N

pla ORFOLK2030

THE GENERAL PLAN
OF THE CITY OF NORFOLK
ADOPTED BY CITY COUNCIL MARCH 26, 2013
Revised September 2019

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
NORFOLK CITY COUNCIL
Paul D. Fraim, Mayor
Anthony L. Burfoot, Vice Mayor
Andrew A. Protogyrou
Paul R. Riddick
Thomas R. Smigiel
Theresa W. Whibley
Angelia M. Williams
Barclay C. Winn
Alveta V. Green, Former Member
Daun S. Hester, Former Member
Donald L. Williams, Former Member W. Randy Wright, Former Member

NORFOLK CITY PLANNING COMMISSION
Mark B. Warlick, Chair
Syble B. Stone, Vice Chair
Lisa Chandler
Earl P. Fraley, Jr.
Bradley M. Law
Daniel A. Neumann, MD
Martin Thomas, Jr.
Richard Diamonstein, Former Member
Jessica James, Former Member
Jared U. Turner, Former Member

NORFOLK DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
Mason Andrews, Chair
C. Douglas Aurand, Vice Chair
David A. Holmes
David J. Klemt
Raymond A. Lyall
Elemuel A. Watts
Christopher Wilson
Claus Ihlemann, Former Member
Barry Moss, Former Member
Franklin Thornton, Jr., Former Member

NORFOLK HISTORIC AND ARCHITECTURAL PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
Donna M. Phaneuf, Chair
Mark Perreault, Vice Chair
Michael E. Glenn
Greta I. Gustavson
Richard Levin
Paige W. Pollard
Paul Clancy, Former Member
Kevin Murphy, Former Member

ii | A CKN O W LE D G E M E N T S A N D C ONT E NT S

CITY OF NORFOLK
Marcus D. Jones, City Manager
Darrell V. Hill, Assistant City Manager
Anne F. Odell, AICP, Assistant City Manager
Ron Williams, Jr. Assistant City Manager

PROJECT COORDINATORS
Paula M. Shea, Principal Planner
Jeremy E. Sharp, AICP, Senior Planner

NORFOLK DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
Frank M. Duke, AICP, Director
George M. Homewood, AICP, Assistant Director
Leonard M. Newcomb III, Zoning Services & Land Use Manager
Jeffrey K. Raliski, AICP, Long Range/Transportation Planning Manager
Lee Rosenberg, Environmental Services Manager
Susan Pollock, Principal Planner
Robert Tajan, Senior Planner
Matthew Simons, City Planner I
Matthew Straley, GIS Technician II
Kevin Du Bois, Environmental Engineer
Seamus McCarthy, Environmental Engineer
Jack Erwin, Landscape Coordinator I
Odell Glenn, Construction Inspector II
Ronald Moore, Senior Design Specialist
Sharon Hilliard, Business Manager
Shelia Livingston-Slagle, Support Technician
Linda Locklear, Support Technician
Tammy Whitehurst, Administrative Secretary

SPECIAL THANKS
Alan Boring
Acquanetta Ellis
Jim Gildea, AICP
Janice Hurley
Adam Melita
Jeryl Rose Phillips, AICP
Ethan Tabakin
Regina V. K. Williams

John Deuel
David Freeman, AICP
Kristen Helgeson
Amanda C. Lutke, AICP
David Parks
Stanley Stein
Denise Thompson
Susannah V. Winstead
Rod Woolard

A CK NO W LE D G E M E NT S A ND C O NT E NT S | iii

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

CONTENTS
CHAPTER 1:

VISION AND INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER 2:

IDENTIFYING LAND USE STRATEGIES

CHAPTER 3:

CREATING AND MAINTAINING HEALTHY AND VIBRANT NEIGHBORHOODS

CHAPTER 4:

PROVIDING TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS

CHAPTER 5:

ENHANCING ECONOMIC VITALITY

CHAPTER 6:

PROMOTING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY

CHAPTER 7:

ENSURING HOUSING CHOICES FOR ALL

CHAPTER 8:

SUPPORTING LIFELONG LEARNING

CHAPTER 9:

DELIVERING QUALITY COMMUNITY SERVICES

CHAPTER 10: ENJOYING DAILY LIFE
CHAPTER 11: PRESERVING OUR HERITAGE
CHAPTER 12: FOSTERING RESPONSIBLE REGIONAL COOPERATION
CHAPTER 13: IMPLEMENTING PLANORFOLK2030
RELATED REPORTS UNDER SEPARATE COVER
Appendix A.

Existing Conditions Report

Appendix B. Plans, Policies and Supplements
A Green Infrastructure Plan for Norfolk
A Pattern Book for Norfolk Neighborhoods
City of Norfolk Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area Program Supplement
City of Norfolk Bicycle and Pedestrian Strategic Plan
Coastal Character District Pattern Book
Commercial and Mixed-Use Pattern Book
Complete Streets Policy
Narrow Lot House Plan Catalog
Ocean View Design Standards and Preferred Architectural Patterns
Sand Management Plan (SMP) Guidance Document
Traditional Neighborhood Plan Book
Vision 2100
Appendix C. Adopted neighborhood plans:
A Plan for Downtown Norfolk 2020
A Strategic Plan for Southside
A Vision for Wards Corner: Urban Development Area Plan

iv | A CK N O W LE D G E M E N T S A N D C ONT E NT S
Revised September 2019

Broad Creek Revitalization and Implementation Plan Book
Central Hampton Boulevard Area Plan
Comprehensive Plan for the Military Highway Corridor
Fairmount Park Neighborhood Revitalization Implementation Plan
Greater Wards Corner Comprehensive Plan
Military Circle/Military Highway Urban Development Area: A Vision for
the Future

MAPS AND TABLES
CHAPTER 1:

VISION AND INTRODUCTION

Map VI-1.

CHAPTER 2:

IDENTIFYING LAND USE STRATEGIES

Table LU-1.
Table LU-2.
Map LU-1.
Map LU-2.
Map LU-3.
Table LU-3.
Map LU-4.

CHAPTER 3:

Plans and Studies Since 1992

Existing Land Use – Citywide by Category
Residential Building Permits Issued – 1992-2011
Future Land Use Map
Character Districts
Vision 2100
Land Use Compatibility Within Noise and Accident Potential Zones
Noise and Accident Potential Zones

CREATING AND MAINTAINING HEALTHY AND VIBRANT NEIGHBORHOODS

No Maps or Tables

CHAPTER 4:

PROVIDING TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS

Map T-1.
Map T-2.
Map T-3.
Map T-4.
Table T-1.
Map T-5.
Map T-6.
Map T-7.

CHAPTER 5:

Existing Federal Functional Classification Principal Arterials
Existing Federal Functional Classification Minor Arterials and
Collector Roads
Port and Rail Facilities
Existing and Future Congestion Level of “Severe”
Cost Estimates – Long Range Transportation Improvements
Long Range Roadway Improvements
Long Range Transit Improvements
Existing and Proposed Bicycle Facilities

ENHANCING ECONOMIC VITALITY

Table EV-1.
Map EV-1.

Employment in Norfolk and the Region
Strategic Economic Development Areas

A CK NO W LE D G E M E NT S A ND C O NT E NT S | v
Revised September 2019

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

CHAPTER 6:

PROMOTING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY

Map ES-1.
Map ES-2.
Map ES-3.
Map ES-4.

CHAPTER 7:

ENSURING HOUSING CHOICES FOR ALL

Map HC-1.

CHAPTER 8:

Redevelopment, Conservation and Special Service Districts

SUPPORTING LIFELONG LEARNING

Table LL-1.
Map LL-1.
Map LL-2.

CHAPTER 9:

FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map
Storm Surge
City Wetland Restoration Projects
Virginia Clean Marinas

Norfolk Public Schools – Current and Projected Utilization
Public Schools
Colleges and Universities

DELIVERING QUALITY COMMUNITY SERVICES

Map CS-1.
Table CS-1.
Map CS-2.

Public Safety Facilities
Crime in the City of Norfolk – 2004-2010
City-Owned Cemeteries

CHAPTER 10: ENJOYING DAILY LIFE
Map DL-1.
Map DL-2.

Public Parks and Recreation Centers
Libraries and Cultural Facilities

CHAPTER 11: PRESERVING OUR HERITAGE
Table H-1.
Table H-2.
Map H-1.
Map H-2.
Map H-3.

Historic Districts
National Register Historic Districts
Local Historic Districts
National Register Historic Districts
Historic Cemeteries

CHAPTER 12: FOSTERING RESPONSIBLE REGIONAL COOPERATION
Map RC-1.

Hampton Roads Region

CHAPTER 13: IMPLEMENTING PLANORFOLK2030
Table IP-1.

Implementation Matrix

vi | A CK N O W LE D G E M E N T S A N D C ONT E NT S

CHAPTER 1: VISION AND INTRODUCTION

A

general plan, referred to as a comprehensive plan in the Code of Virginia, is a
local government’s guide to future physical, social, and economic development.
Comprehensive plans are not meant to function as land use regulations in
themselves, but instead serve as the basis for local land use decisions through the
provision of a long range vision of the community in the future.
The Commonwealth of Virginia specifically requires local planning commissions to
“prepare and recommend a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the
territory within its jurisdiction” [Code of Virginia, Section 15.2-2223] and that adopted
plans be reviewed at least every five years. Norfolk’s comprehensive plan, the General
Plan of Norfolk, was adopted in 1992, and based on both its age and the many changes
in the City since that time, a new general plan is needed. Some of the specific major
changes and issues that have emerged since the adoption of the General Plan of Norfolk
in 1992 include the following:
•
•

Expanded community involvement and engagement in local government
operations and decision making.
Advanced technology and communication permitting more citizen involvement.
V I SI O N A ND I NT R OD U CT I ON | 1-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
•
•
•

Greater awareness of environmental challenges such as flooding and sea level
rise.
Increased transportation options, including light rail, and the desire to become a
more bikeable and walkable city as part of the more balanced total
transportation network.
Commitments for greater efficiency and transparency in government, linked to
funding and economic challenges.

This new general plan, plaNorfolk2030, responds to these changes and establishes a
vision and guide for the development of the City over the next 20 years.

1-2 | V I S I O N A N D I N T R OD U CT I ON

VISION
Comprehensive plans are often referred to as maps to the future. plaNorfolk2030 is no
different in that regard; it charts the course to Norfolk’s future. In order to develop a
map, one must have a destination in mind. Otherwise, if you do not know where you
are going, any road will lead you there. The destination for a community is found in the
vision that the citizens and elected officials have for their community.
In the case of plaNorfolk2030, the vision for where Norfolk will be in 2030 is:

Norfolk, a real city that is a great place to live, work and play, with:
◼
◼

◼

◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼
◼

Strong and safe neighborhoods where people want to live, each
with its own unique identity and design;
A comprehensive transportation system – rare among cities of its
size – that offers a wide variety of choices, while also serving as a
regional transportation hub;
A healthy economy that provides varied employment opportunities
for a well-trained workforce, a world class port, a strong military
presence, with a vibrant Downtown and thriving commercial centers
throughout the City;
A sustainable environment that is not simply protected, but
enhanced;
A variety of well-maintained housing options that are affordable and
accessible to all residents;
Opportunities for learning that extend through all stages of life;
A well managed government that provides efficient and accountable
public services to its citizens;
A wide variety of cultural and recreational opportunities that lead to
a fun and healthy lifestyle for a diverse population;
A long and rich history that is reflected in its architecture and
cultural resources; and
A commitment to regional cooperation, recognizing the importance
of a regional approach in the 21st Century.

PLAN ORGANIZATION
plaNorfolk2030 is organized into 13 chapters, beginning with this Vision and
Introduction chapter. The next 11 chapters each address a unique topic area
corresponding to a different part of the vision statement. The first of these is the
“Identifying Land Use Strategies” chapter, which sets the plan on a path to create “a real
city that is a great place to live, work, and play,” taken directly from the first statement

V I SI O N A ND I NT R OD U CT I ON | 1-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
of the vision. Each subsequent chapter corresponds to the next statement of the vision.
Concluding the plan is an Implementation chapter that speaks to how the plan is to be
implemented, updated, and amended.
The chapters are as follows:
• Chapter 1. Vision and Introduction
This is the introduction to the Vision for the City of Norfolk and serves as the
basis for plaNorfolk2030.
• Chapter 2. Identifying Land Use Strategies
Norfolk is a mature, developed city. Of Norfolk’s nearly 28,000 acres of land,
only 3.1% is vacant. New development is either the result of redevelopment
or infill. The Land Use chapter outlines the steps necessary to aid the
development of complementary land uses or facilitate land use change.
• Chapter 3. Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
Norfolk is a city of neighborhoods and has a long history of neighborhood
planning. Successful plaNorfolk2030 implementation will enable residents to
take greater ownership of their neighborhoods.
• Chapter 4. Providing Transportation Options
Norfolk continues to plan for a true multi-modal transportation system,
permitting safe and efficient travel by automobiles, mass transit, pedestrians
and bicycles. Investment in transportation choices is essential to supporting
both economic development activities and housing choices.
• Chapter 5. Enhancing Economic Vitality
Norfolk is the business, cultural, educational, and medical center of the
Hampton Roads region. To continue this role, Norfolk seeks reinvestment,
reuse, and redevelopment of existing properties and supports education and
lifelong learning opportunities.
• Chapter 6. Promoting Environmental Sustainability
Meeting the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their needs is the key to preserving the natural
environment and preparing for potential risks posed by natural events. In
addition to protecting and enhancing the environment, Norfolk strives to
conserve resources and reduce the overall impact of the built environment
on the natural environment.
• Chapter 7. Ensuring Housing Choices for All
Norfolk focuses significant resources on making its housing stock and
neighborhoods competitive and attractive in the regional real estate market,
while still striving to maintain affordability for both homeowners and renters.
• Chapter 8. Supporting Lifelong Learning
Norfolk provides its residents, from birth through retirement and beyond,
with opportunities to develop their skills and interests.

1-4 | V I S I O N A N D I N T R OD U CT I ON

•
•

•
•

•

Chapter 9. Delivering Quality Community Services
Norfolk is committed to providing effective and efficient services to its
citizens, ensuring continued high quality of life.
Chapter 10. Enjoying Daily Life
Norfolk, as the urban center of the Hampton Roads region, provides multiple
opportunities for people to relax and play. The continued and expanded
availability of such opportunities is critical to the success of any vibrant city.
Chapter 11. Preserving Our Heritage
Norfolk has a long and rich history that is reflected in its architecture and
cultural resources, which Norfolk continues to embrace and protect.
Chapter 12. Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation
Vibrant metropolitan regions are the key to growth and development.
Hampton Roads communities seek to improve regional economic
competitiveness through enhancement of regional amenities and services. In
addition, there are opportunities to develop regional approaches to
emerging issues such as sea level rise.
Chapter 13. Implementing plaNorfolk2030
plaNorfolk2030 must be used in it entirety, including both text and maps, to
guide decision making about physical development and public infrastructure.

Chapters 2 through 12 begin with a restatement of the appropriate vision statement,
general background information, and an identification of key issues related to the topic.
Each chapter contains one or a series of goals, each with a number of outcomes,
metrics, and actions. Goals are general statements of the ideals toward which the City
strives. Outcomes define what success would look like for that goal while metrics
provide a method to measure progress towards achieving that goal. Actions define the
specific steps necessary to realize each outcome, and ultimately, each goal. Together,
the actions form a work plan for the City, summarized in the implementation chapter.

PLAN DEVELOPMENT
At the direction of the Norfolk City Planning Commission and with the concurrence of
City Council, staff initiated an update of the General Plan of Norfolk. The process of
drafting plaNorfolk2030 began with re-examination of the General Plan of Norfolk,
adopted in 1992. Each of that plan’s goals, policies, and actions were reviewed to
determine its implementation status and whether it should be included in the new plan.
City Council reviewed the more than 90 neighborhood area plans and studies
undertaken since 1992 to determine what should be included in the new plan (see Map
VI-1) to ensure that citizen expectations arising from prior planning efforts continue to
be properly reflected.

V I SI O N A ND I NT R OD U CT I ON | 1-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP VI-1. PLANS AND STUDIES SINCE 1992

1-6 | V I S I O N A N D I N T R OD U CT I ON

The vision statement for plaNorfolk2030 was developed by the City Planning
Commission and subsequently reviewed and affirmed by City Council. The plan
elements were developed by a series of technical advisory teams, one for each element,
composed of technical experts including City staff which were charged with drafting a
series of desirable goals and outcomes tied to metrics, as well as the actions that would
be necessary to accomplish them. The information developed by these groups was
compared to the requirements of the Code of Virginia1, to ensure consistency with State
requirements, and compiled to form a complete draft plan which was reviewed and
approved by the City Planning Commission in a series of 8 meetings.
The initial work of the City Planning Commission was reviewed with the community
through a series of 6 open house meetings conducted throughout the City, an online
forum for community discussion and distribution of the draft plan at all libraries. Over
150 citizens participated in the open houses, providing approximately 425 unique
comments that were recorded and reviewed with the City Planning Commission,
resulting in numerous adjustments to the revised draft plan.
The revised draft plan was then submitted to the formal review and adoption process,
including review by the Virginia Department of Transportation (VDOT) specified in the
Code of Virginia [Sections 15.2-2225 and 15.2-2226].

USING THE PLAN
plaNorfolk2030 must be used in its entirety, including both text and maps, to guide decision
making about physical development and public infrastructure. It is intended to be
sufficiently flexible to respond to changes in development patterns with amendments made
when determined to be necessary. Chapter 13, Implementing plaNorfolk2030, outlines the
procedures for both use of the plan and amendments to the plan.

1

Code of Virginia [Sections 15.2-2223 and 15.2-2224] requires that the plan address: land use;
transportation, including a transportation map, with cost estimates for improvements; affordable
housing; Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act comprehensive plan requirements; and implementation.
Communities in the coastal region must adopt an environmental program based on the regulations
adopted by the Chesapeake Bay Local Assistance Board. These regulations are designed to guide and
assist local governments with administering an environmental program that promotes the commitments
of the Bay Act.

V I SI O N A ND I NT R OD U CT I ON | 1-7

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

1-8 | V I S I O N A N D I N T R OD U CT I ON

CHAPTER 2: IDENTIFYING LAND USE STRATEGIES

“A real city that is a great place to live, work, and play”

N

orfolk encompasses approximately 53 square miles of land and 13 square
miles of water. Residential uses are predominant at 41.4%, followed by
military uses (15.6%), open space and recreation uses (10.7%), and utility and
transportation uses (8.1%). Table LU-1 illustrates the existing land use pattern, as of July
2009, for the vast majority of the 53 square miles of land. The remaining land that is not
addressed in the table is primarily city-owned right-of-way.

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
TABLE LU-1
EXISTING LAND USE – CITYWIDE BY CATEGORY
Source: 2009 City Assessor Download (not including water) – Refined to July 31, 2009

Category
Low Density Residential
Medium Density Residential
High Density Residential
Commercial/Office
Industrial
Mixed Use
Institutional
Open Space/Recreation
Utility/Transportation
Military
Vacant
Total

Acres
9,171
1,067
1,336
2,239
1,681
36
1,941
2,986
2,259
4,367
863
27,946

% Total
32.8%
3.8%
4.8%
8.0%
6.0%
0.1%
7.0%
10.7%
8.1%
15.6%
3.1%
100.0%

Norfolk is a mature, developed city. Of Norfolk’s nearly 28,000 acres of land, only 3.1%
is vacant. Given that the amount of land is finite, new development in Norfolk is either
the result of redevelopment or infill.
Residential development trends point to a resurgence of the housing market in Norfolk,
specifically as it relates to multifamily housing. Table LU-2 illustrates that since 1992
almost 9,000 new housing units have been permitted in the City. Coupled with this new
construction have been a significant number of demolitions, resulting in the net addition
of 1,445 housing units since 1992. While the number of housing units demolished each
year has generally remained stable during this period, there has been a marked increase
in the number of new units built since 2001, moving the City from a net loss of housing
units each year to a net gain.

2-2 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S

TABLE LU-2
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED – 1992-2011
Source: City of Norfolk Building Permit Data

Year
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
Total
Average/Year

Total New
229
227
278
386
214
187
329
229
301
403
662
748
770
1,273
762
350
1,046
588
305
600
9,887
494

Demolished
496
307
443
496
238
500
553
465
836
357
303
359
1,006
241
310
360
135
132
113
262
7,912
395

Net New
-267
-80
-165
-110
-24
-313
-224
-236
-535
46
359
389
-236
1,032
452
-10
911
456
192
338
1,975
99

The composition of the City’s residential market has also been changing as a result of
recent development. Between 1992 and 2011, 42.1% of the building permits were for
single-family detached units, far less than current composition of the housing stock
(79.2% low density). This shift away from single-family detached housing illustrates
Norfolk’s increasing market strength in the area of urban living, which is unique in the
region and may represent a shift away from the suburbanization that the region has
experienced over the past several decades.

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Trends in the non-residential market are harder to identify from available building
permit data, which indicate a steady rate of construction in terms of permits issued, but
a significant amount of variability in terms of the value of construction. For example,
non-residential building permits totaled approximately $53 million in 1999 and jumped
to $138 million in 2000 due to an $80 million expansion at Norfolk International Airport.

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, following are the key issues involving land use
in Norfolk:
1. Complementing Norfolk’s existing built and natural environment or facilitating
land use change in specific areas.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Enhancing Economic Vitality
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability

Land Use Goal 1. Ensure that the type and quality of land uses will
complement or enhance the community’s physical characteristics.
Outcome LU1.1. Future land use map and categories that respect neighborhood
characteristics and meet the demand for each type of use.
Action LU1.1.1. Use the Future Land Use Map, in conjunction with the text, to guide
the location and character of development (see Map LU-1).

2-4 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S

MAP LU-1. FUTURE LAND USE MAP

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-5
Revised September 2019

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action LU1.1.2. Implement residential land use categories that reflect existing
successful neighborhood patterns with regard to lot width, structure type, setback,
and vehicular use areas. The residential land use classifications are:
Land Use Classification
Single Family Suburban

Single Family
Traditional

Single Family Urban

Description
o Single family detached development
characterized by houses set back further from
the street, front-loaded driveways and garages,
and a curvilinear street pattern with the general
absence of on-street parking, curbs, and
sidewalks.
o Lot widths of 70 feet or more and larger lot sizes
(lots that are approximately 7,500 square feet or
more).
o Single family detached development
characterized by houses set back a moderate
distance from the street, driveways leading to
rear garages, and streets typically in a grid
pattern with sidewalks and on-street parking.
o Lot widths ranging from approximately 50 to 70
feet and lots ranging from approximately 4,000
to 7,500 square feet.
o Older, predominantly single family detached
development characterized by older homes, with
minimal setbacks from the street, few driveways
and garages, and streets typically in a grid
pattern with sidewalks and on-street parking.
o Lot widths of less than 50 feet and lots smaller
than 5,000 square feet.

2-6 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-7

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Land Use Classification
Residential Mixed

Multifamily Corridor

Multifamily

Description
o Residential areas with a greater variety of
housing types than generally found in other
residential land use categories.
o Typically developed as walkable neighborhoods
with interconnected streets and sidewalks and
buildings that are similar in scale, no matter what
the use.
o Typically duplexes, townhomes, and smaller
apartment and condominium structures that are
no more than one story taller than surrounding
uses, or a maximum of four stories tall, with
minimal setbacks from the street, and limited
parking located to the rear or side.
o Often located at the edges of single family
neighborhoods that can provide a variety of
housing options and potentially serve as a buffer
to more intense uses.
o Typically townhome, apartment, or
condominium complexes with designated
parking areas and common open space, and with
vehicular entrances and exits.
o Developed as stand-alone communities that can
provide a variety of housing options, and located
in close proximity to employment centers, transit
options, or other lifestyle and site amenities.

2-8 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S

Residential Mixed

Multifamily Corridor

Multifamily

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-9

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action LU1.1.3. Implement non-residential land use categories to meet market
demand while recognizing the importance of accessibility, infrastructure capacity,
and the relationship in scale and use to the neighborhood. The non-residential land
use classifications are:
Land Use Classification
Commercial

Office

Downtown

Industrial

Utility/ Transportation

Institutional

Description
o Broad range of retail sales and services, as well
as hotels and offices, typically located along
arterial roadways, near transit hubs, or in
neighborhood-serving nodes.
o May include residential uses, typically located
above the ground floor in a mixed use
development.
o A variety of office-type uses, such as realtors and
attorneys, often developed as complexes along
arterial roadways or near transit hubs, with
internal street networks and amenities, or as a
buffer between lower intensity residential uses
and more intense uses.
o This category may also include accessory services
such as retail sales and services and daycare
facilities.
o High-intensity blend of residential, retail sales
and services, hotel, office, institutional, and civic
uses supporting a pedestrian-oriented
environment.
o Wide variety of manufacturing, warehousing,
distribution, and office-warehouse uses,
including flex space. Typically these are more
intense land uses and require a buffer when
located adjacent to a less intense use.
o Accessory services such as office or retail sales
and services may be appropriate in this category.
o Utility providers, such as water, sewer, and
electric, or providers linked to the transportation
of goods. The ports, airport, and water
distribution facilities are examples of land uses
found in this category. Typically these are more
intense land uses and require a buffer when
located adjacent to a less intense use.
o Public and private schools and their surrounding
recreation fields, universities and colleges,

2-10 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S

Land Use Classification

Military

Open Space/
Recreation

Description
medical centers, public facilities, and religious
institutions located on sites of at least one acre.
o Accessory services, such as office, housing, and
retail sales and services, related to the function
of the institutional use may be appropriate in
this category.
o Defense related uses on property owned by the
U.S. Government or the Commonwealth of
Virginia. Uses are varied, potentially including all
other land use categories.
o Passive and active parks, playing fields,
recreation centers, environmentally sensitive
land, and cemeteries that are at least one acre in
size. Playing fields and recreation centers
associated with education facilities are classified
as “Institutional.”

Action LU1.1.4. Support mixed use development in appropriate locations in
Residential Mixed, Multifamily Corridor, Multifamily, Commercial, and Office
designated areas provided that it includes a combination of two or more land uses,
at least one of which is residential and the other is non-residential, it includes the
use depicted on the Future Land Use Map as part of the mixed use development,
and it includes complementary uses.
Comments:

Mixed use development provides a variety of benefits
including the creation of a vibrant sense of place and
community, with areas that are active throughout the day.
Mixed use development can provide housing options for a
diversity of household types, often including higher density
housing, such as apartments and townhouses. Mixed use
developments provide a variety of services and activities
within a walkable distance of housing, allowing residents to
conduct more of their daily activities without depending on
automobiles, and in many instances can provide increased
travel options.

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-11

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action LU1.1.5. Support the development of uses in Transit Supportive Areas (areas
surrounding selected rail stations) that create opportunities for a mix of
employment and residential activity that promotes transit, bicycle, and pedestrian
activity, while discouraging low intensity auto-oriented uses (see Map LU-1).
Action LU1.1.6. Utilize a series of Character Districts (see Map LU-2) to establish
differing development standards based on the existing predominant development
character in an area. The Character Districts are as follows:
Downtown
o Downtown areas developed first with a broad range of higher-intensity
uses, limited on-site parking, common open and green space, and
widespread pedestrian and transit accessibility.
Traditional
o Areas primarily developed in the early 20th Century, with a grid pattern of
streets, smaller lots, and a variety of uses located in proximity to one
another.
Suburban
o Suburban areas developed after WWII with more curvilinear streets, larger
blocks and lot sizes, and a greater separation of uses.
Coastal
o Areas along the Chesapeake Bay developed in a linear fashion centered on
Ocean View Avenue, broken up by a repeating pattern of north-south
streets leading to beach accesses, and developed with an eclectic mix of
housing types interspersed with neighborhood-scale commercial uses.

2-12 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised March 2016

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-13
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP LU-2. CHARACTER DISTRICTS

2-14 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised January 2018

Action LU1.1.7. Use Vision 2100 to guide land use decisions.
Comments:

Vision 2100 was incorporated by reference into
plaNorfolk2030 on November 22, 2016 and is included in
Appendix B.

Action LU1.1.8. Encourage development in flood resilient areas that are served by
existing municipal services and infrastructure.
Action LU1.1.9. Evaluate any potential changes in land use classification to
Multifamily or Multifamily Corridor residential using the following criteria:
Multifamily
o Sites to be identified as Multifamily must meet the following requirements:
o The site is either within ¼ mile of an arterial road, is within ¼ mile
of an existing bus route, or is within a Transit Supportive Area (see
Map LU-1).
o The site is currently developed with multifamily housing or is
adjacent to a Multifamily, Multifamily Corridor, Mixed Residential,
Downtown, Industrial, Office, or Commercial designation on the
Future Land Use Map (see Map LU-1).
o The site can accommodate the open space, parking, buffering, and
stormwater facilities as required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Multifamily Corridor
o Sites to be identified as Multifamily Corridor must meet the following
requirements:
o The site is either located on an arterial or collector road or is within
a Transit Supportive Area (see Map LU-1).
o The site is currently developed with multifamily housing, or can
serve as a buffer between less intense single family neighborhoods
and other more intense uses including multifamily, industrial,
office, and commercial (see Map LU-1).
o The site can accommodate the open space, parking, buffering, and
stormwater facilities as required by the Zoning Ordinance.
Action LU1.1.10. Ensure that new multifamily housing is designed to meet the
following criteria:
o Building height, placement, and massing that is consistent with
surrounding development.
o Appropriately sized and sited open space.
o Appropriately sized, sited, and located parking.
o Landscaping.
o Buffers.
o Access points and sidewalks.
I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-15
Revised January 2018

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP LU-3. VISION 2100

2-16 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised August 2017

VISION AREAS
Vision 2100 divides the City into four vision
areas and provides a set of goals and actions
for each. The best way to understand the
distinction between the four vision areas is to
imagine their placement on two competing
axes: a vertical axis representing the number
of key citywide assets in the present or future
and a horizontal axis representing the risk
presented by sea level rise or other recurrent
flooding risks. The strategy set forth for each
vision area is intended to respond to the
unique challenges brought about by the
unique set of circumstances in each.

Present/Future Assets

High

Low

Designing New Urban Centers
Green areas are at low-risk of
coastal flooding and have great
potential for high density,
mixed-use and mixed income
development. These areas are
prime opportunities for
creating walkable, bikeable,
transit-rich communities. The
City should encourage
transformational development
in these areas.

Establishing Neighborhoods of
the Future
Purple areas are established
neighborhoods at less-risk of
coastal flooding. The City
should make investments that
improve connections between
these areas and key economic
assets to ensure that these
neighborhoods continue to
thrive.

Enhancing Economic Engines
Red areas are home to key
economic assets that are
essential to the city’s future.
Land use policy and
infrastructure investments to
protect these areas should
encourage additional dense
mixed-use development in
these areas.

Adapting to Rising Waters
Yellow areas are established
neighborhoods that
experience more frequent
flooding. The City should
explore new and innovative
technologies to help reduce
flood risk and focus on
investments on extending the
resilience of key infrastructure.

Flooding Risk

High

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-17
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action LU1.1.11. Encourage the creation of new exclusively-commercial locations in
nodes at the intersections of roads rather than at isolated mid-block locations.
Action LU1.1.12. Identify potential areas for transition or intensification of land use
(see Enhancing Economic Vitality chapter).
Action LU1.1.13. Evaluate reuse options for city-owned facilities that are planned
for closure.
Action LU1.1.14. Apply the standards of an Urban Development Area (UDA), as
defined by the Code of Virginia § 15.2-2223.1, to development, including
infrastructure, in the Downtown character district, the Military Circle Area and the
Wards Corner UDA (as outlined in “Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant
Neighborhoods” chapter), and in Transit Supportive Areas.
Comments:

The Commonwealth of Virginia defines UDAs as areas that
are appropriate for higher density development due to
proximity to transportation facilities or other infrastructure
and suitable for redevelopment or infill development. UDAs
are to be developed in accordance with the principles of
traditional neighborhood design.

Action LU1.1.15. Ensure that new development in the Traditional and Coastal
Character Districts fits with the predominant development character in those areas
by incorporating more strict form standards into the Zoning Ordinance.
Action LU1.1.16. Develop pattern books to clearly establish the appropriate
development form and style for all new development in the Traditional and Coastal
Character Districts, and for new commercial and multifamily development in the
Suburban Character District.

2-18 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised September 2019

Outcome LU1.2. Development regulations and practices that support a quality built
and natural environment.
Metrics:
o Change in linear feet of unbuffered
lower intensity residential land and
more intense land uses.
o Percent of development within areas
with design guideline mandates that
comply with design regulations.
o Percent of land area within noise
contours and Accident Potential Zones
(APZs) that complies with Land Use
Compatibility as defined in the 2005
Hampton Roads Joint Land Use Study.
o Percent of properties in flood zones
that do not receive a variance to
waive requirements related to flood
protection.
Action LU1.2.1. Develop new zoning tools reflecting best practices to address lot
width, building placement, building form, landscaping, stormwater, and vehicular
uses areas (driveways, parking lots, and garages) to ensure that development is
compatible with surrounding land uses.
Action LU1.2.2. Develop appropriate land use transitions between lower-intensity
residential areas and other more intense land uses by amending the zoning
ordinance to provide appropriate vegetated buffers to ensure meaningful separation
of uses or by applying slightly more intense uses adjacent to lower-intensity uses,
with the transition occurring at the rear property lines.
Action LU1.2.3. Establish parking standards within the Character Districts (see Map
LU-2) based on the most current research on parking by the Institute of Traffic
Engineers, and other professionally-recognized organizations.
Action LU1.2.4. Update zoning regulations to ensure the adequate provision of open
space in multifamily residential and planned development districts.
Action LU1.2.5. Revise zoning regulations, developing new commercial categories
and appropriate regulations that better reflect the current function of commercial
areas as neighborhood-serving, community-serving, or region-serving.

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-19
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action LU1.2.6. Encourage the use of design guidelines wherever possible to ensure
compatible development.
Comments:

Design guidelines are legally required in locally designated
historic districts, Pedestrian Commercial Overlay districts,
and City and Norfolk and Redevelopment Authority (NRHA)
owned property, including encroachments.

Action LU1.2.7. Ensure that all new development in designated flood-prone areas
complies with the city’s flood protection regulations (see the Promoting
Environmental Sustainability chapter).
Action LU1.2.8. Evaluate the impact of potential sea level rise when reviewing
development proposals and future changes to development regulations (see the
Promoting Environmental Sustainability and Fostering Responsible Regional
Cooperation chapters).
Comments:

Several research and technical assistance resources related
to sea level rise are available, including those provided by
Old Dominion University and the Virginia Institute of Marine
Science.

Action LU1.2.9. Ensure that development is resilient by updating zoning regulations
to strengthen stormwater management requirements, mitigate the impact of
flooding, and expand the use of energy efficient equipment, materials, and design.
Comments:

Examples include requiring the onsite capture of rainwater,
elevated structures, and the use of Energy Star rated HVAC
systems.

2-20 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised August 2017

Action LU1.2.10. Continue enforcement of the Airport Safety Zone Overlay District,
restricting heights in designated areas.
Action LU1.2.11. Ensure that zoning regulations reflect noise zones and accident
potential zones (APZs) so that residents are aware of the impact of airport
regulations on land use (see Map LU-4).
Comments:

Land uses around airports (Norfolk International Airport and
Chambers Field) are potentially impacted by noise and APZs.
The City is continuing to work with the Navy on issues
relating to the natural and built environment around Naval
Air Station Norfolk.
Table LU-3 shows the Navy’s
recommendations for land use in noise zones and APZs.

TABLE LU-3
LAND USE COMPATIBILITY WITHIN NOISE AND ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONES
Source: Hampton Roads Joint Land Use Study 2005

Noise Zones
Land Use

Less
than 65
DNL

65-70
DNL

70-75
DNL

Accident Potential Zones
Greater
than 75
DNL

Clear
Zone

APZ 1

APZ 2

Outdoor Amphitheaters
Residential
Transient Lodging
Churches, Schools
Commercial, Retail, Services
Wholesale, Manufacturing
Public Rights-of-way
Compatible
Conditionally Compatible
Incompatible

Action LU1.2.12. Do not support any proposed increase in intensity of uses located
in incompatible noise and accident potential zones (see Map LU-4) and seek
opportunities to reduce the intensity of those incompatible uses.
Action LU1.2.13. Coordinate land use planning with institutions, including the
military, colleges and universities, and medical institutions, to ensure compatibility
with surrounding neighborhoods.

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-21
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP LU-4. NOISE AND ACCIDENT POTENTIAL ZONES

2-22 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised August 2017

Action LU1.2.14. Enhance buffering, landscaping, and parking standards for newly
established automobile sales and repair establishments.
Action LU1.2.15. Work to bring existing automobile sales or repair establishments
into compliance with applicable codes, with an emphasis on buffering, landscaping,
and parking.
Comments:

Norfolk has a significant number of “grandfathered” automobile
sales or repair establishments. When these establishments want
to expand or otherwise change their operations, they must
obtain a special exception.

Action LU1.2.16. Ensure that the design and scale of public utility structures are in
keeping with the surrounding uses and that the placement minimizes physical or
visual obstructions and avoids environmentally sensitive areas.
Action LU1.2.17. Develop design guidelines for public utility structures.
Action LU1.2.18. Work to ensure that building codes continue to provide adequate
protection from potential hazards.

I D E NT I FY I NG L A ND U SE S T R A T E G I E S | 2-23
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

2-24 | I D E N T I FY I N G L A N D U SE S T R A T E G I E S
Revised August 2017

CHAPTER 3: CREATING AND MAINTAINING HEALTHY
AND VIBRANT NEIGHBORHOODS

“Strong and safe neighborhoods where people want to live,
each with its own unique identity and design.”

N

orfolk is a city of neighborhoods. These neighborhoods are essential
components of the physical and social character of the City, providing a variety
of housing choices in density, style, and price. Many neighborhoods also
include commercial, industrial, or institutional uses, in varying quantities, providing
goods and services to residents, and potentially to the larger community. These uses, in
combination with such things as historic landmarks, parks, open spaces, and religious
institutions, represent community assets that establish the unique identity of each
neighborhood.
At present, there are more than 125 active neighborhood civic leagues registered with
the City. This large number of civic leagues reflects the historic importance Norfolk has
placed on neighborhood organization and community involvement.
Norfolk has a long history of neighborhood planning efforts. Beginning in the 1970s, the
City began preparing and implementing numerous neighborhood plans and zoning
studies. Initially, these plans were focused on areas that had been targets of earlier
C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I NI NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
redevelopment efforts supported by federal urban redevelopment funds. As federal
policy shifted in the 1980s, the focus of city plans shifted to neighborhood preservation
and revitalization, an emphasis that continues to evolve. Whereas earlier plans often
spoke only to the actions for which the City was responsible, more recent neighborhood
plans have been expanded to encourage neighborhoods to affect change themselves, in
partnership with the City, rather than relying on City actions alone.

In support of this new focus on resident involvement in neighborhood planning, the City
has developed an array of programs to ensure that residents have the capacity to
participate effectively. Such capacity building programs, which provide neighborhood
leaders with tools to organize and operate their groups more effectively, are a key first
step in the revitalization process for many neighborhoods, and a valuable method for
enhancing the effectiveness of neighborhood organizations throughout the City. One
program, “Neighbors Building Neighborhoods,” seeks to create neighborhoods of choice
by increasing resident capacity, strengthening neighborhood connections, crafting a
positive neighborhood image, and building a viable and competitive real estate market.

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, following are the key issues involving
neighborhoods in Norfolk:
1. Enabling residents to take ownership of their neighborhoods.
2. Enhancing the vitality of Norfolk’s neighborhoods.
3. Creating opportunities for vibrant neighborhoods.
4. Developing a strategy for guiding area planning efforts into the future.
5. Continuing implementation of previously prepared neighborhood planning
efforts.

3-2 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Enjoying Daily Life
o Preserving Our Heritage
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

Neighborhoods Goal 1. Enable neighborhood residents to take ownership
of their neighborhoods.
Outcome N1.1. Enhanced resident and civic organization capacity to shape their
communities.
Metrics:
o Percent change in activity and participation in civic organizations.
o Percent change in participation in Neighbors Building Neighborhoods
Academy.
Action N1.1.1. Identify a core group of engaged neighborhood residents with the
capacity to affect change, and work with them prepare and implement community
engagement strategies.
Comments:

A community engagement strategy is a type of plan that
focuses on building the capacity of an individual
neighborhood, or group of neighborhoods, to plan for its
own future.

Action N1.1.2. Continue to support citizen organizations in their efforts to improve
their communities.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I NI NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action N1.1.3. Support neighborhood activities and celebrations, such as picnics,
festivals, and other similar events.
Action N1.1.4. Invest in programs, such as the Neighbors Building Neighborhoods
Academy, that build capacity among residents to formulate and assume ownership
of neighborhood values, standards, and goals.
Comments:

Neighbors Building Neighborhoods Academy is a leadership
training program, created as part of the Neighbors Building
Neighborhoods program, to provide residents with the skills
needed to organize their neighborhoods.

Action N1.1.5. Foster the development of community partnerships, capitalizing on
the energy and expertise of institutions such as universities and the faith-based
community and the capabilities of neighborhood residents, to improve
neighborhood character, maintenance, and safety while maximizing the effective
use of city resources.
Action N1.1.6. Continue to involve neighborhood civic leagues, and other similar
organizations, in the decision-making process for city actions such as land use
changes.
Comments:

The City has established a policy of directly notifying civic
leagues regarding applications for rezoning, special
exception, or similar land use change on property located
within their neighborhood. Civic leagues are encouraged to
review and comment on these applications.

Action N1.1.7. Expand civic outreach efforts to more effectively involve traditionally
underserved individuals, such as youth.

3-4 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S

Comments:

One aspect of Neighbors Building Neighborhoods Academy
focuses on engaging youth and providing opportunities for
youth to be involved in neighborhood initiatives.

Action N1.1.8. Promote Norfolk’s centralized call center to improve the City’s
effectiveness in responding to neighborhood needs.
Action N1.1.9. Develop a public outreach program to educate neighborhood
residents regarding city programs available to them and their responsibilities related
to accessing those services.
Comments:

Norfolk residents are provided services that depend on
specific actions being taken by residents, such as moving
cars on street sweeping days or removing solid waste bins
from the right-of-way after collection day. City code
requires that residents maintain the landscaped areas
located between the sidewalk and the edge of the pavement
in front of their homes. Broad citizen compliance with such
requirements helps to improve both service delivery and
neighborhood appearance.

Neighborhoods Goal 2. Enhance the vitality of Norfolk’s neighborhoods.
Outcome N2.1. Improved maintenance of private property.
Metrics:
o Percent of property maintenance violations investigated within 72 hours.
o Percent of houses showing improved conditions (in Conservation Areas
and Special Service Districts).
o Percent change in average property values.
Action N2.1.1. Investigate reported code violations within 72 hours of an initial
report and continue to address all related issues until they are resolved.
Action N2.1.2. Encourage the continuation of the landlord registration programs
offered by some colleges and universities located in the City and the expansion of
such programs to other institutions.
Comments:

Old Dominion University currently operates a landlord
registration program wherein the owners of available rental
properties register and list their properties with the
University. The program includes a voluntary safety check

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I NI NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
where the program’s staff works with property owners to
ensure that their rental units meet safety standards. Such
programs encourage the proper upkeep and maintenance of
the City’s rental housing stock by giving preference to those
units that are well maintained.
Action N2.1.3. Continue to support home maintenance and other home
improvement initiatives.
Action N2.1.4. Promote maintenance of rental housing by educating tenants about
their rights and responsibilities under the Virginia Residential Landlord and Tenant
Act.
Action N2.1.5. Encourage the return of abandoned housing to safe and useful
occupancy, through the Derelict Structures Program, employing demolition of
structures that cannot be rehabilitated as a last resort.
Comments:

The Derelict Structures Program promotes revitalization of
structures that have been vacant and boarded up with no
utility service for at least six months, rehabilitating
structures that might otherwise endanger the public’s
health, safety, or welfare.

Outcome N2.2. Improved maintenance of public property and infrastructure.
Metrics:
o Participation in adopt-a-spot programs.
o Percent of the City meeting IES lighting standard.
Action N2.2.1. Simplify the manner in which information on infrastructure
maintenance needs can be collected from residents by creating a single online
reporting mechanism.
Comments:

Examples of maintenance requests that can be collected
using such a mechanism include potholes, sidewalks in need
of repair, malfunctioning streetlights or traffic signals, or
water/sewer main breaks.

Action N2.2.2. Encourage neighborhoods, businesses, and other organizations to
take a larger role in cleaning and maintaining public spaces.
Action N2.2.3. Evaluate the need for changes to the Residential Permit Parking
Program to more effectively apply to neighborhoods that have high demand for on-

3-6 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S

street parking and a limited supply, particularly those neighborhoods near major
institutions.
Action N2.2.4. Evaluate the City’s lighting standards and ensure that neighborhoods
meet the standard by maintaining existing street lights and adding new lights where
they are appropriate.
Comments:

Norfolk utilizes standards established by the Illuminating
Engineering Society (IES) to determine whether an area is
adequately lit with street lights. Enhanced lighting above
IES standard may sometimes be warranted by local
conditions.

Action N2.2.5. Encourage civic leagues to invite owners of rental properties to join
neighborhood organizations to promote improved property maintenance.
Outcome N2.3. Strong and safe neighborhoods and neighborhood residents.
Metrics:
o Percent change in property and violent crime rates.
o Percent change in the number of neighborhoods participating in
Neighborhood Watch or Business Watch programs.
Action N2.3.1. Continue police outreach efforts,
such as the Police Assisted Community
Enforcement (PACE) program, that improve
communications between neighborhoods and
the Police.
Action N2.3.2. Continue to support programs
such as Neighborhood Watch, Business Watch,
and Citizen’s Police Academy, and initiatives such
as Safer by Design, that increase neighborhood
surveillance and reduce opportunities for crime
to occur.
Action N2.3.3. Support after-school and other
programs which provide youth with positive
alternative activities.
Action N2.3.4. Evaluate development regulations to identify ways that the principles
of “Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design” (CPTED) can be incorporated
into the design of newly-developed and redeveloped areas.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I NI NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-7

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Outcome N2.4. Neighborhoods of choice that embrace people from a diversity of
incomes and ethnicities.
Metrics:
o Percent of Population Residing in Racially-Or Poverty-Concentrated
Census Tracts
Action N2.4.1. Encourage the creation of neighborhoods in which people choose to
live by enabling residents to take ownership of their neighborhoods.
Action N2.4.2. Strengthen neighborhoods by giving existing housing programs a
strategic focus and introducing new programs to increase the impact (see Ensuring
Housing Choices for All chapter).
Action N2.4.3. Support efforts to increase demand and competitiveness for housing
in neighborhoods in transition.
Action N2.4.4. Deconcentrate clusters of poverty and prevent future clusters by
facilitating new housing options for low-income residents in communities of
opportunity.
Action N2.4.5. Develop a coordinated, long term strategy to address obsolete public
housing communities.
Action N2.4.6. Ensure that affordable housing is located in proximity to employment
centers, service centers, and public transit.
Action N2.4.7. Support the efforts of the “creative class” as they work to enhance
the vibrancy of Norfolk’s neighborhoods.
Comments:

“Creative class” is a term used to describe workers in
science, engineering, education, computer programming,
research, the arts, design, and media.

Action N2.4.8. Support the development of appropriately scaled and located
neighborhood retail uses.

3-8 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

Neighborhoods Goal 3. Enhance neighborhood character, design, and
visual identity.
Outcome N3.1. Neighborhoods with a well-defined sense of identity that reflects
their history, architecture, and physical environment.
Metrics:
o Percent of development within areas with design guideline mandates that
comply with design regulations.
o Percent of developable vacant lots in local and National Register historic
districts subsequently developed with appropriate buildings.
Action N3.1.1. Develop and prioritize a list of improvements to public spaces,
including streets, which can serve to enhance visual character and improve the
pedestrian environment.
Comments:

Improvements to public space, such as landscaping,
decorative crosswalks, signs or banners, and other similar
elements, are enhancements that strengthen neighborhood
identity and create a more pleasant walking environment.

Action N3.1.2. Develop a program for the establishment of gateways to residential
neighborhoods that are behind commercial corridors.
Action N3.1.3. Develop design criteria for new
public buildings and spaces to enhance the
character of the neighborhoods in which they are
located and, where appropriate, can serve as
iconic places (see the Delivering Quality
Community Services chapter).
Action N3.1.4.
Continue to work with
neighborhoods on the installation and
maintenance of neighborhood identification
signs.
Action N3.1.5. Encourage the use of pattern
books and design guidelines, both within and
outside the City’s historic districts, to achieve a
higher level of architectural quality.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I NI NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-9
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N3.1.6. Evaluate the effectiveness of Pedestrian Commercial Overlay (PCO)
zoning districts, and consider potential ordinance revisions to ensure that they serve
the purpose for which they were intended.
Comments:

PCO zoning districts encourage the location of specialty
retail, entertainment, and restaurant uses in concentrations
and to a scale that encourages pedestrian movement.

Action N3.1.7. Evaluate the effectiveness of programs intended to revitalize
Norfolk’s commercial corridors.

Action N3.1.8. Develop design guidelines for use in evaluating grant funding
proposals for aesthetic improvements of commercial properties.
Action N3.1.9. Revise development regulations to ensure that infill residential
development is compatible with surrounding properties.
Comments:

The Zoning Ordinance may establish regulations regarding
setbacks, building height, the placement of parking facilities,
and other aspects of building form.

Action N3.1.10. Identify locations where it may be appropriate and financially
feasible to relocate above-ground utility lines underground.
Action N3.1.11. Continue to promote the Real Estate Ambassadors Program to
communicate the quality of Norfolk’s neighborhoods to real estate professionals
throughout the region.

Neighborhoods Goal 4. Implement an area planning policy.
Outcome N4.1. Plans are focused on areas experiencing or in need of change.
Metrics:
o Percent of plans developed in areas that meet criteria as defined.
3-10 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

Action N4.1.1. Evaluate the need to prepare an area plan based on the following
circumstances:
o An area is impacted by a significant infrastructure project.
o An area is subject to a major expansion of a facility.
o An area is experiencing development interests that are different from
the prevalent development pattern.
o An area is lagging behind the rest of the City in one of three factors:
o Social issues – such as crime, educational performance, or
health conditions
o Physical issues – such as failing infrastructure or poor
maintenance of private property
o Economic issues – such as reduced income levels or elevated
unemployment rates
Action N4.1.2. Inform area planning approach based on location(s) status in Vision
2100.
Comments:

Vision 2100 identifies four types of areas: Red Areas –
Enhancing economic engines; Yellow Areas – Adapting to
rising waters; Green Areas – Designing new urban centers;
and Purple Areas – Establishing neighborhoods of the future.
Each of these areas calls for a different approach to area
planning. For example, neighborhood strategies for purple
areas may focus on neighborhood strengthening and
identity.

Action N4.1.3. Consider neighborhoods as a whole during the area planning process,
as well as potentially-affected areas located just outside the neighborhood.
Action N4.1.4. Present proposals for plan initiation to City Council in a formal setting
for action.
Action N4.1.5. Ensure that residents affected by a plan may actively participate in its
development by forming an advisory committee and by conducting community
meetings at appropriate times throughout the planning process.
Comments:

Potential advisory committee membership includes residents
designated by the civic league, property owners, business
owners, faith-based
or not-for-profit community
organizations, and staff with technical expertise. Plan
stages at which community meetings may be appropriate

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-11
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
include the vision development stage, the implementation
strategy development stage, and prior to plan adoption.
Action N4.1.6. Evaluate past plans prepared for an area prior to beginning a new
planning effort, considering whether those plans achieved their stated goals and, if
not, whether those goals are desirable.
Action N4.1.7. Include in each plan clear, measurable statements of desired
outcomes, supplemented by a series of attainable strategies, including proposed
capital projects, program changes, and ordinance revisions, as well as lead
responsibility, projected timeframes, and implementation costs for each.
Action N4.1.8. Address the role of potential partners in the plan implementation
process.
Action N4.1.9. Submit completed area plans for formal action by City Council and
rescind prior plans that are in conflict, to ensure a clear direction for the area.
Action N4.1.10. Adopt area plans by reference into plaNorfolk2030, and amend
plaNorfolk2030 to reflect the recommendations of the area plan, where appropriate.
Action N4.1.11. Submit a formal report on area plan implementation to City Council
at least every three years, including an update on the status of implementation
actions, an assessment of the plan’s success at achieving the stated goals, and a
recommendation on any revisions that may be needed.

Neighborhoods Goal 5. Continue the implementation of area plans.
In the spring of 2009, City Council reviewed and assessed the neighborhood and area
plans and studies that had been prepared since the adoption of the 1992 General Plan.
The actions from 74 separate plans and studies were reviewed by Council. This review
resulted in Council reaffirming a series of actions for the areas discussed below. In
addition, subsequent planning studies and community engagement have resulted in
further planning actions, also included below.
Actions that were included in neighborhood plans but that cannot be applied city-wide,
such as undergrounding utilities, reuse of city-owned facilities, bike lanes, and reduction
of impervious surfaces, can be found in other parts of this chapter or other chapters.
With the exception of the neighborhood-specific actions in this chapter, all actions
found in this plan apply to all neighborhoods.
Outcome N5.1. Support for the following actions in designated areas.

3-12 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

Action N5.1.1. Continue to implement the following actions in the Broad Creek area.
o N5.1.1(a). Support
NRHA’s continued
development of
new rental and
homeownership
units.
o N5.1.1(b). Support
NRHA
implementation of
the redevelopment
plan for Moton
Circle.
o N5.1.1(c). Continue
to support the
revitalization of
Grandy Village.
o N5.1.1(d). Work
with NRHA on the
development of a
South Brambleton revitalization plan.
o N5.1.1(e). Develop a new library facility for the Broad Creek community,
possibly in conjunction with a new elementary school.
o N5.1.1(f). Continue to support the Salvation Army’s development of a Ray
and Joan Kroc Corps Community Center in the Broad Creek community.
o N5.1.1(g). Prepare a master plan for Douglas Park and acquire properties, as
appropriate, to assist in the implementation of the plan.
o N5.1.1(h). Initiate acquisition within the Spartan Village neighborhood in
order to assist with the implementation of improved area-wide stormwater
controls.
o N5.1.1(i). Continue to evaluate and implement flood protection alternatives
in the Spartan Village area as a city priority.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-13

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.2. Continue to implement the following actions in the Central Hampton
Boulevard area.
o N5.1.2(a). Revise
regulations to
require that new
non-residential
buildings be at least
two stories.
o N5.1.2(b). Revise
regulations to
require that retail
and commercial
uses have strong
ground-floor visual
and access
connections to the
sidewalk, with
walkability and
sense of place as a
priority.
o N5.1.2(c). Continue
to implement the Hampton Boulevard Improvement Project (HBIP) with lane
and signal improvements, sidewalks, landscaping and burial of utilities.
o N5.1.2(d). Develop access management plans for Hampton Boulevard and
the 26th Street industrial corridor in conjunction with property owners.
o N5.1.2(e). Require the installation of additional street trees, wider verges,
and other planting strip vegetation, with streetscape improvements on
Hampton Boulevard, Killam Avenue, and Colley Avenue a priority.
o N5.1.2(f). Explore the possibility of on-street parking where absent.
o N5.1.2(g). Evaluate traffic calming measures, such as neckdowns, to prevent
cut-through traffic on neighborhood streets where needed.
o N5.1.2(h). Study transit travel patterns and demand to identify potential
service enhancements, including improved signage and bus shelters, and
coordinate service timing, routes, stops and information between HRT and
ODU shuttle services.
o N5.1.2(i). Revise development regulations to restrict the location of parking
areas to the side or rear of buildings and ensure building entrances front
onto a public right-of-way to ensure a pedestrian orientation.
o N5.1.2(j). Revise development regulations to ensure active uses around
parks and plazas, encourage retail awnings over sidewalks and street tree
species that provide shade.

3-14 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S

o N5.1.2(k). Engage the local community in the development of gateway
treatments at major entry points using public art, street trees and other
landscaping elements.
o N5.1.2(l). Engage local artists to create unique enhancements to streets and
parks, particularly at entrance points to the Central Hampton Boulevard
Area.
o N5.1.2(m). Encourage the development of a wayfinding program by ODU in
the vicinity of the University and University Village.
o N5.1.2(n). Develop a PCO for North Colley Avenue.
o N5.1.2(o). Revitalize North Colley commercial areas by improving public
infrastructure and providing grant funding for aesthetic improvements of
commercial properties.
o N5.1.2(p). Develop a special purpose zoning district for Knitting Mill Creek,
working with civic leagues, property owners, and businesses to identify
preferred uses and standards.
o N5.1.2(q). Work with businesses to find appropriate relocation sites,
preferably in the 26th Street industrial, research, and office district or
elsewhere within Norfolk.
o N5.1.2(r). Revise development regulations to ensure that buildings and
landscaping contribute to the character of the neighborhoods and the form
of public open spaces, including streets.
o N5.1.2(s). Support ODU’s development of the southern phase of University
Village, while encouraging retail uses in the area that appeal to the broader
community.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-15

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.3. Implement the following actions for the Chelsea Business District
area.
o N5.1.3(a). Create a
pedestrian and
bicycle friendly
streetscape by
improving sidewalks
and lighting,
installing new
pedestrian-scale
signage, benches,
trash receptacles,
and bike racks, and
enhancing
crosswalks and
sharrows/bicycle
lanes where
appropriate.
o N5.1.3(b). Focus
short-term
streetscape
improvements on the west side of Orapax Avenue, emphasizing its role as
the primary pedestrian corridor into the business district.
o N5.1.3(c). Consider extending the Enterprise Zone to include the Chelsea
Business District.
o N5.1.3(d). Consider zoning modifications to support the development of
vendors and pop-up businesses.
o N5.1.3(e). Encourage the re-use of existing vacant buildings.
o N5.1.3(f). Consider changing the zoning designations of industrially-zoned
properties utilized for commercial or residential purposes to better reflect
current and potential uses.
o N5.1.3(g). Support neighborhood efforts to make the Chelsea Business
District a testing ground for innovative sustainability approaches, such as
wind and solar energy installations, rain gardens, and other similar methods.
o N5.1.3(h). Support the placement of public art throughout the business
district, with an emphasis on wayfinding.

3-16 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.4. Continue to implement the following actions in the Colonial PlaceRiverview area.
o N5.1.4(a). Market
the Riverview
Village area as a
location of specialty
stores as a means
of attracting small,
independent
retailers.
o N5.1.4(b).
Encourage the
reuse of the
Riverview Theater
as a component of
the redevelopment
of the area along
Granby Street
south of 41st Street.
o N5.1.4(c). Continue
to support
improvements to the pedestrian environment in Riverview Village through
zoning, such as the Pedestrian Commercial Overlay, incentives, and capital
improvements.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-17
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.5. Continue to implement the following actions in the Cottage Line
area.
o N5.1.5(a).
Encourage mixed
use development
along East Ocean
View Avenue
between
Chesapeake Street
and the Ocean View
Golf Course.
o N5.1.5(b). Revise
development
regulations to
ensure that new
buildings maintain
the continuity of
the street face.
o N5.1.5(c). Develop
streetscape
standards for East
Ocean View Avenue appropriate for its intended purpose as a residential
boulevard.
o N5.1.5(d). Develop a gateway overlay zoning district for East Ocean View
Avenue, between Cape View Avenue and Chesapeake Boulevard.
o N5.1.5(e). Develop a system of pedestrian and bicycle paths to improve
connections to Community Beach Park, Ocean View Golf Course, and Lake
Modoc.

3-18 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.6. Continue to implement the following actions in the Downtown area.
o N5.1.6(a). Improve
pedestrian crossings
of Waterside Drive,
Brambleton Avenue,
and St. Paul’s
Boulevard.
o N5.1.6(b). Extend
the esplanade from
Town Point Park to
Harbor Park and
ensure that the
design
accommodates
bicycles.
o N5.1.6(c).
Reconfigure Civic
Plaza to include new
driveway access from
St. Paul’s Boulevard,
a memorial to commemorate the End of Massive Resistance, and enhanced
landscaping.
o N5.1.6(d). Develop the new Col. Samuel Slover Norfolk Main Library, the
new Courthouse Complex, and the Multi-Modal Transfer Station at Harbor
Park.
o N5.1.6(e). Support the expansion of the Chrysler Museum.
o N5.1.6(f). Revise parking regulations in the area north of Brambleton
Avenue.
o N5.1.6(g). Support the creation of an "Arts District" in the area north of
Brambleton Avenue, between St. Paul's Boulevard and the Chrysler Museum,
by making regulatory changes to encourage the appropriate mix of uses.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-19
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.7. Implement the following actions for the Downtown Arts District.
o N5.1.7(a). Create a
pedestrian and bicycle
friendly streetscape by
improving sidewalks,
installing new
pedestrian-scale
lighting and landscape
planting areas,
enhancing crosswalks
and sharrows/bicycle
lanes, and reducing
speed limits where
appropriate.
o N5.1.7(b). Consider
converting two travel
lanes of W. Virginia
Beach Boulevard
between Granby Street
and Boush Street to onstreet parking defined
by landscaping.
o N5.1.7(c). Evaluate options for re-configuring or redeveloping the Harrison
Opera House parking lot to create a more active, green street edge along W.
Virginia Beach Boulevard.
o N5.1.7(d). Consider re-configuring Monticello Avenue to create new onstreet parking areas that could potentially double as spaces for pop-up retail
or a farmer’s market.
o N5.1.7(e). Create gateways to the district at the intersections of Granby
Street with Brambleton Avenue and Virginia Beach Boulevard, Llewellyn
Avenue with W. Virginia Beach Boulevard, and E. Olney Road with Monticello
Avenue and St. Paul’s Boulevard.
o N5.1.7(f). Explore the possibility of transforming Magazine Lane into a smallscale market street and central square for the district.
o N5.1.7(g). Encourage the re-use of existing buildings and the development of
new buildings on excess surface parking.
o N5.1.7(h). Support the development of innovative art installations.
o N5.1.7(i). Consider zoning modifications to support the development of
artist studios and arts entertainment venues, vendors and pop-up
businesses, and artist housing.

3-20 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.8. Continue to implement the following actions for the East Little Creek
Road Corridor.
o N5.1.8(a). Establish
an East Little Creek
Road Task Force to
guide future
organizational,
regulatory,
marketing, and
financial decisions
along the corridor.
o N5.1.8(b). Work
with the East Little
Creek Road Task
Force to explore
the development of
a branding theme
that could be
applied throughout
the corridor to
define it as a place.
o N5.1.8(c). Work with the East Little Creek Road Task Force to identify areas
for appropriately scaled commercial uses consistent with action LU1.2.5.
o N5.1.8(d). Revitalize the East Little Creek Road commercial areas by
continuing to provide grant funding for aesthetic improvements of
commercial properties.
o N5.1.8(e). Encourage redevelopment of the commercial area between
Chesapeake Boulevard and Sewells Point Road.
o N5.1.8(f). Identify and pursue acquisition and demolition of targeted
properties on both sides of East Little Creek Road.
o N5.1.8(g). Develop a streetscape plan for the East Little Creek Road corridor
between Meadow Creek Road and Sewells Point Road.
o N5.1.8(h). Encourage stronger transit, bicycle, and pedestrian linkages
throughout the East Little Creek Road commercial areas and along
Chesapeake Boulevard between East Little Creek Road and Fisherman’s
Road.
o N5.1.8(i). Ensure that Tarrallton Park is accessible to both pedestrians and
bicyclists from the intersection of East Little Creek Road and Halprin Drive.
o N5.1.8(j). Explore options for improving access to the L. C. Page Branch Post
Office.
o N5.1.8(k). Develop a gateway overlay zoning district for the intersection of
Shore Drive and East Little Creek Road.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-21
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
o N5.1.8(l). Improve pedestrian and bicycle crossings of East Little Creek Road
at its intersection with Halprin Drive.
o N5.1.8(m). Enhance buffering, landscaping, and parking standards for newly
established automobile sales and repair establishments along E. Little Creek
Road.
o N5.1.8(n). Work to bring existing automobile sales or repair establishments
along E. Little Creek Road into compliance with applicable codes, with an
emphasis on buffering, landscaping, and parking.

3-22 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.9. Continue to implement the following actions in the East Ocean View
area.
o N5.1.9(a).
Encourage
neighborhoodoriented
commercial
activities along
Shore Drive and the
shores of Pretty
Lake east of the
Shore Drive Bridge.
o N5.1.9(b).
Encourage
redevelopment of
the shopping center
at Shore Drive and
Pretty Lake Avenue.
o N5.1.9(c).
Encourage
development of
commercial uses on Shore Drive south of Pretty Lake that are compatible
with and complement the adjacent waterfront uses.
o N5.1.9(d). Acquire the large parking lot east of Shore Drive and south of
Pretty Lake so that it may be redeveloped as a waterfront marina.
o N5.1.9(e). Revise development regulations governing building height and
separation to ensure maintenance of views to the Chesapeake Bay and Pretty
Lake, and to provide opportunities for access to the water.
o N5.1.9(f). Develop a gateway overlay zoning district for the intersection of
Shore Drive and East Little Creek Road.
o N5.1.9(g). Revise development regulations to encourage the development of
affordable infill housing, utilizing appropriate design criteria, in the area
north of Pretty Lake.
o N5.1.9(h). Develop streetscape standards for East Ocean View Avenue
appropriate for its intended purpose as a residential boulevard.
o N5.1.9(i). Develop streetscape standards for Shore Drive, south of Pretty
Lake, appropriate for its intended purpose as a waterfront commercial area.
o N5.1.9(j). Revitalize Shore Drive commercial areas by improving public
infrastructure and providing grant funding for aesthetic improvements of
commercial properties.
o N5.1.9(k). Continue to evaluate and implement flood protection alternatives
in the East Ocean View area as a city priority.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-23
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
o N5.1.9(l). Consider potential waterway conflicts with military operations
when evaluating development proposals in the Little Creek/Fisherman’s Cove
area.
o N5.1.9(m). Improve public infrastructure on streets west of Shore Drive,
evaluating the need for sidewalks, stormwater facilities, and street
improvements.

3-24 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.10. Continue to implement the following actions in the Fairmount Park
area.
o N5.1.10(a).
Support paper
street closures to
provide for side
yards and
opportunities for
infill.
o N5.1.10(b).
Encourage local
banks and lending
institutions to
develop community
partnerships to
provide special
support to
residents and
buyers.
o N5.1.10(c).
Consider restricting
on-street parking to one side of the street to reduce the impact of parking on
traffic flow.
o N5.1.10(d). Work with the Army Corps of Engineers to develop a plan for
improving the area at the end of Somme Avenue for pedestrian enjoyment as
a part of a wetlands mitigation project.
o N5.1.10(e). Develop special recreational programming targeted to residents
in and around Fairmount Park.
o N5.1.10(f). Explore the feasibility of developing a pedestrian connector
linking Shoop and Barraud Parks, including walkways along the Lafayette
River.
o N5.1.10(g). Develop gateway treatments for the Lafayette Boulevard
Triangle, Cromwell Drive at Tidewater Drive, Tidewater Drive at Shoop
Avenue, and Lafayette Boulevard at Tidewater Drive.
o N5.1.10(h). Support the organization of an area business association.
o N5.1.10(i). Market the commercial areas of the neighborhood to new
community oriented retailers and service interests.
o N5.1.10(j). Support NRHA acquisition of land necessary for new
development opportunities.
o N5.1.10(k). Support NRHA acquisition of underutilized properties on the
southeast corner of Tidewater Drive and Lafayette Boulevard for potential
conversion to retail uses.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-25
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
o N5.1.10(l). Develop an attractive community gathering place in the vicinity of
the intersection of Lafayette Boulevard and Brest Avenue.
o N5.1.10(m). Support rehabilitation of residential developments along
Lafayette Boulevard.

3-26 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.11. Continue to implement the following actions for the Fort NorfolkMedical Center area.
o N5.1.11(a). Revise
development
regulations to
require building
heights to step
down to the water
to maintain views.
o N5.1.11(b). Ensure
that the waterfront
area is accessible to
both pedestrians
and bicyclists.
o N5.1.11(c).
Encourage stronger
transit, pedestrian,
and bicycle
connections from
Fort Norfolk to
Ghent.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-27
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.12. Continue to implement the following actions for the Greater Ghent
area.
o N5.1.12(a). Create a
promenade linking
Harrison Opera
House with the
Chrysler Museum.
o N5.1.12(b). Explore
the feasibility of a
Business
Improvement
District (BID).
o N5.1.12(c).
Encourage stronger
transit, bicycle, and
pedestrian linkages
from Ghent to
Downtown Norfolk
and Fort Norfolk.
o N5.1.12(d). Utilize
historic district
design guidelines to ensure the development of appropriately designed new
buildings, and promote the appropriate maintenance and rehabilitation of
existing structures in the Ghent historic district.
o N5.1.12(e). Continue to evaluate and implement flood protection
alternatives in the Hague area as a city priority.

3-28 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.13. Continue to implement the following actions for the Greater
Norview/Five Points area.
o N5.1.13(a). Work to
attract new businesses
to the district that
would improve
pedestrian use of
Sewells Point Road, as
indicated by an area
market study.
o N5.1.13(b). Encourage
the improvement of
the existing post office
and its parking lot.
o N5.1.13(c). Evaluate
the traffic pattern at
the interchange of
Chesapeake Boulevard
with Interstate 64.
o N5.1.13(d). Working
with property owners,
create opportunities for commercial redevelopment in Five Points through
land assembly and acquisition.
o N5.1.13(e). Study and implement traffic circulation improvements on
Chesapeake Boulevard, north of the Five Points intersection, to improve
safety, access, and circulation for commercial properties.
o N5.1.13(f). Implement the streetscape plan for Sewell’s Point Road to
improve pedestrian safety and provide an attractive environment for
development of neighborhood-serving commercial establishments, such as
lighting, plantings, and signage.
o N5.1.13(g). Evaluate the effectiveness of the PCO to and amend as needed to
best fit the needs of future neighborhood development.
o N5.1.13(h). Evaluate the need and potential locations for a city parking
facility to provide additional parking for area businesses.
o N5.1.13(i). Consider modifying code requirements to encourage economic
development and the reuse of vacant structures.
o N5.1.13(j). Evaluate the potential for converting Hugo Street from a one way
to a two way street.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-29
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.14. Continue to implement the following actions for the Greater Wards
Corner area.
o N5.1.14(a). Identify
and pursue
acquisition and
demolition of
properties on both
sides of East Little
Creek Road.
o N5.1.14(b). Ensure
proper
maintenance of City
acquired properties.
o N5.1.14(c). Pursue
opportunities for
passive and active
recreation in
partnership with
the community on
City-owned properties in Denby Park for short term use.
o N5.1.14(d). Encourage townhomes and market-rate rentals in residentiallydesignated areas along East Little Creek Road.
o N5.1.14(e). Evaluate land use changes fully considering current and future
transportation opportunities.
o N5.1.14(f). Support relocation of the head-in parking in the Titustown retail
area in order to facilitate streetscape improvements and the use of the
parking lots located at the rear of the retail buildings.
o N5.1.14(g). Support the redevelopment of commercial properties at the
intersection of Granby Street and Little Creek Road.
o N5.1.14(h). Continue to monitor traffic conditions at the intersection of East
Little Creek Road and Virginian Drive to ensure that appropriate traffic
conditions are maintained.
o N5.1.14(i). Consolidate and relocate points of access in the commercial areas
along Granby Street and Little Creek Road.
o N5.1.14(j). Improve pedestrian and bicycle connections throughout Wards
Corner, especially to and in the commercial areas.
o N5.1.14(k). Pursue opportunities to add passive and active recreation space,
landscaping, and trees throughout the Wards Corner area.
o N5.1.14(l). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Promote the implementation of the
plan through the City’s development review process.
o N5.1.14(m). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Engage with key landholders in
creative redevelopment and land assemblage opportunities.

3-30 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised September 2019

o N5.1.14(n). [Wards
Corner UDA Area]
Implement near
term and funded
transportation
improvements
o N5.1.14(o). [Wards
Corner UDA Area]
Conduct detailed
feasibility study for
a combined
intermodal station
area.
o N5.1.14(p). [Wards
Corner UDA Area]
Support and
coordinate with
the upcoming DEIS
for the east side
alignment for the extension of light rail or other high capacity transit to Naval
Station Norfolk.
o N5.1.14(q). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Develop a trail connection from the
Wellness Center to Wards Corner
o N5.1.14(r). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Conduct a preliminary feasibility study
for a trail connection to the Terminal Boulevard Trail.
o N5.1.14(s). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Implement strategic near-term green
street and landscaping enhancements where feasible.
o N5.1.14(t). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Creatively use zoning to incentivize a
framework for a walkable mixed-use setting for Wards Corner.
o N5.1.14(u). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Identify and pursue funding options to
support the development and maintenance of necessary infrastructure to
support the plan.
o N5.1.14(v). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Create a block-by-block strategy for
property-owner outreach and implementation of public/private agreements.
o N5.1.14(w). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Develop phased roadway and public
realm improvements to transform Wards Corner into a walkable center
based on Traditional Neighborhood Design principles.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-31
Revised September 2019

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.15. Continue to implement the following actions for the Huntersville
area.
o N5.1.15(a).
Develop and
implement a
streetscape plan to
improve the
appearance of
Tidewater Drive.
o N5.1.15(b).
Evaluate possible
alternatives for
extending light rail
from Downtown to
the north along
Church Street.
o N5.1.15(c). Better
identify
Huntersville and
improve its image
with tools such as gateway signage, landscaping, lighting, banners, public art,
and enhanced crosswalks.
o N5.1.15(d). Encourage land uses and businesses that are compatible with the
neighborhood by utilizing zoning tools such as conditional zoning.
o N5.1.15(e). Support business development that provides employment
through workforce development initiatives.
o N5.1.15(f). Upgrade and expand recreational opportunities by renovating the
Huntersville community center and expanding programming opportunities.
o N5.1.15(g). Improve the physical condition of the neighborhood through
code enforcement, landlord and tenant outreach, and participation in other
rental education programs.
o N5.1.15(h). Reduce speeding in the neighborhood with various traffic calming
measures such as electronic surveillance.
o N5.1.15(i). Support transit use by evaluating the appropriateness of existing
bus stop locations and installing bus shelters and trash containers.
o N5.1.15(j). Enhance neighborhood safety by encouraging neighborhood
activities such as the Neighborhood Watch Program and by addressing
trespassing and loitering issues.
o N5.1.15(k). Ensure quality infill development that preserves affordability by
creating a plan book and creating development opportunities on vacant lots.
o N5.1.15(l). Explore tools and funding sources for rehabilitation of existing
housing.

3-32 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised March 2016

Action N5.1.16. Continue to implement the following actions for the Mid-Town
Industrial Area.
o N5.1.16(a). Explore
making Fawn and
Gazel Streets twoway streets.
o N5.1.16(b). Market
underutilized
warehouse spaces
for reuse.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-33
Revised March 2016

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.17. Implement the following actions in the Military Circle Area.
o N5.1.17(a). Coordinate
redevelopment efforts
with planning for the
extension of light rail or
other high capacity
transit and other
infrastructure planning.
o N5.1.17(b). Do not
approve short-term
developments that will
impede the realization
of the long-term vision.
o N5.1.17(c). Conduct
studies (DEIS) and
coordinate planning
necessary for the
determination of the
locally preferred
alternative for an east
side alignment for the extension of light rail or other high capacity transit to
Naval Station Norfolk.
o N5.1.17(d). Advance preliminary engineering and final environmental
documentation for the locally preferred alternative for the extension of light
rail or other high capacity transit and develop a project funding plan.
o N5.1.17(e). Conduct transportation studies needed to best realize the Vision
Plan including a future major street network framework, layout, and
functionality analysis, including the potential reconfiguration of the Military
Highway and Virginia Beach Boulevard and the existing interchange.
o N5.1.17(f). Outline a new street pattern to create “green and complete
streets” with a walkable urban grid and connections to surrounding areas,
and identify needed right-of-way improvements to support future
development.
o N5.1.17(g). Locate civic facilities and recreation amenities throughout the
area to serve both the new community and the surrounding neighborhoods.
o N5.1.17(h). Address stormwater management issues to support new
development.
o N5.1.17(i). Outline utility improvements needed to support new
development.

3-34 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

o N5.1.17(j). Develop a parking strategy to accommodate a phased
redevelopment of the area.
o N5.1.17(k). Develop and adopt zoning tools to create a framework as a
walkable urban setting, centered on transit.
o N5.1.17(l). Create a pattern book to give guidance to new development to
support the creation of walkable urban spaces and the integration of green
infrastructure.
o N5.1.17(m). Identify and pursue funding options to support the development
and maintenance of necessary infrastructure to support the plan.
o N5.1.17(n). Explore incentives necessary to realize the plan.
o N5.1.17(o). Leverage city-investments as a catalyst for private sector
investment.
o N5.1.17(p). Develop a branding strategy that supports the creation of a new
identity for the area.
o N5.1.17(q). Outline a phased buildout approach for the redevelopment of
Military Circle Mall and the surrounding area the introduction of light rail.
o N5.1.17(r). Identify and implement the appropriate oversight mechanism to
facilitate the redevelopment of Military Circle Mall and the surrounding area.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-35
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.18. Continue to implement the following actions for the Military Highway
Corridor.
o N5.1.18(a). Establish
a Military Highway
Corridor District Task
Force to guide future
organizational,
regulatory,
marketing, and
financial decisions
along the corridor.
o N5.1.18(b). Work
with the Military
Highway Corridor
District Task Force to
explore the
development of a
branding theme that
could be applied
throughout the
corridor to define it as
a place.
o N5.1.18(c). Support the redevelopment of the shopping center at the
northeast corner of North Military Highway and Norview Avenue, and the
flea market site on the east side of North Military Highway near Lynn Street.
o N5.1.18(d). Develop a streetscape plan for the Military Highway corridor that
can be implemented in conjunction with roadway improvements.
o N5.1.18(e). Revitalize Military Highway commercial areas by providing grant
funding for aesthetic improvements of commercial properties.
o N5.1.18(f). Support the continued roadway improvements to North Military
Highway from Lowery Road to Interstate 64.
o N5.1.18(g). Enhance buffering, landscaping, and parking standards for newly
established automobile sales and repair establishments along Military
Highway.
o N5.1.18(h). Work to bring existing automobile sales or repair establishments
along Military Highway into compliance with applicable codes, with an
emphasis on buffering, landscaping, and parking.

3-36 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

Action N5.1.19. Implement the following actions for the Monticello-Granby
Corridor.
o N5.1.19(a).
Promote the
transition of the
MonticelloGranby Corridor
from
predominantly
industrial and
automobileoriented uses to a
higher intensity of
mixed use
development,
including
residential.
o N5.1.19(b).
Ensure that all
new development
projects provide
an active
streetscape for Granby Street and Monticello Avenue by constructing
buildings with active first floor uses, with façades built to the right-of-way
line, and with at least 50% first floor transparency.
o N5.1.19(c). Ensure that new development does not negatively impact the
residential and institutional character of the surrounding neighborhoods by
providing adequate parking for all uses and adequate open space for
residential uses.
o N5.1.19(d). Consider expansion of the G-1 zoning district, or the creation of
one or more additional zoning districts throughout the corridor to ensure
appropriate development form.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-37
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.20. Continue to implement the following actions for the Park Place
area.
o N5.1.20(a). Do not
permit fast food
restaurants with
drive-throughs and
businesses that sell
alcohol for off
premise
consumption.
o N5.1.20(b). Evaluate
the potential
conversion of
Llewellyn and
Colonial Avenues to
2-lane roadways with
raised medians.
o N5.1.20(c). Develop
and implement
streetscape plans for
35th Street, Granby
Street, Colonial Avenue, and Llewellyn Avenue that support enhanced
pedestrian activity and safety.
o N5.1.20(d). Work with Norfolk Public Schools to evaluate the creation of an
early childhood center at the Monroe Elementary School site.
o N5.1.20(e). Promote the transition of Colonial Avenue between the railroad
tracks and W. 26th Street from predominantly industrial uses to a mixture of
commercial, office, and residential uses.
o N5.1.20(f). Ensure that all new development and substantial redevelopment
along Colonial Avenue between the railroad tracks and W. 26th Street
provides an active streetscape by providing buildings set back no more than
10 feet from the right-of-way line with substantial first floor transparency,
locating parking areas to the side or rear of buildings and screening parking
areas that must be located adjacent to the right-of-way, and by limiting uses
to those of a pedestrian-oriented nature.
o N5.1.20(g). Promote the transition of Granby Street between the railroad
tracks and 29th Street from predominantly industrial uses to a mixture of
commercial, office, and residential uses.
o N5.1.20(h). Ensure that all new development and substantial redevelopment
along Granby Street between the railroad tracks and 29th Street provides an
active streetscape by providing buildings set back no more than 10 feet from
the right-of-way line with substantial first floor transparency, providing
building facades of at least two stories along Granby Street, locating parking
3-38 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

areas to the side or rear of buildings and screening parking areas that must
be located adjacent to the right-of-way, by providing street trees or other
similar landscaping between the sidewalk and the road, and by limiting uses
to those of a pedestrian-oriented nature.
o N5.1.20(i). Continue efforts to promote economic development by
supporting business education and networking opportunities.
o N5.1.20(j). Monitor the availability and location of automobile parking on the
35th Street Corridor.
o N5.1.20(k). Evaluate the need for traffic calming measures along the 35th St.
Corridor.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-39
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.21. Continue to implement the following actions for the St. Paul’s area.
o N5.1.21(a). Replace
public housing units
in Tidewater
Gardens on a onefor-one basis.
o N5.1.21(b). Ensure
tenant relocation
that is sensitive to
resident needs.
o N5.1.21(c). Provide
a housing mix
matching the
anticipated
demographic
profile of future
public housing
households in St.
Paul’s.
o N5.1.21(d).
Develop partnerships to facilitate the implementation of redevelopment in
the St. Paul’s area.
o N5.1.21(e). Create a development program that outlines necessary
infrastructure for redevelopment of the St. Paul’s area and determine
funding needs.
o N5.1.21(f). Create a feasible financing strategy for the redevelopment of the
St. Paul’s area.
o N5.1.21(g). Develop a feasible phasing strategy for the redevelopment of the
St. Paul’s area.
o N5.1.21(h). Develop St. Paul’s as a mixed-use, mixed-income neighborhood.
o N5.1.21(i). Create a human capital plan, family-based case management, a
workforce development strategy, an education and youth development
initiative, and comprehensive health programs.
o N5.1.21(j). Provide recreation and open space opportunities throughout St.
Paul’s.
o N5.1.21(k). Develop necessary stormwater infrastructure, utilizing green
design wherever possible, while coordinating with citywide stormwater
initiatives.
o N5.1.21(l). Improve community form in St. Paul’s through site placement,
massing, and other design aspects of buildings that address their urban
setting, while embracing churches and civic buildings as landmarks, providing
a network of complete streets, and incorporating public art throughout.

3-40 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

o N5.1.21(m). Reconnect the missing links in the transportation infrastructure
of the St. Paul’s area, including improved connections at the perimeter and
improved bicycle and transit access.
o N5.1.21(n). Remove barriers to pedestrian mobility in the St. Paul’s area and
ensure a safe and inviting walking environment throughout.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-41
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.22. Continue to implement the following actions for the Southside area.
o N5.1.22(a).
Evaluate the reuse
of the Campostella
Landfill site as a
potential
recreational
amenity.
o N5.1.22(b).
Support the
redevelopment of
the salvage yard on
East Indian River
Road as a new
industrial park.
o N5.1.22(c).
Remove the
damaged
Steamboat Creek
(Springfield
Avenue) Bridge.
o N5.1.22(d). Ensure public access to the water by incorporating public
walking trails in the redevelopment of the land on the east and west sides of
the Campostella Bridge.
o N5.1.22(e). Study the feasibility of creating a walking trail linking the
neighborhoods south of East Indian River Road to the Indian River Creek.
o N5.1.22(f). Develop a streetscape plan for the Campostella Road and Wilson
Road corridors, paying special attention to the intersections of Campostella
Road and Wilson Road, and Wilson Road and Indian East Indian River Road.
o N5.1.22(g). Develop streetscape plans for the portion of South Main Street
north of Berkley Avenue.
o N5.1.22(h). Revitalize Campostella Road commercial areas by providing
grant funding for aesthetic improvements of commercial properties.
o N5.1.22(i). Facilitate the organization of a business association in Southside
to promote retail development.
o N5.1.22(j). Continue to support the annual Berkley Neighborhood Reunion
and other community-based activities.

3-42 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

Action N5.1.23. Continue to implement the following actions for the West Ocean
View area.
o N5.1.23(a).
Support the
application of
mixed-use zoning in
the area on the
south side of West
Ocean View
Avenue, between
1st View Street and
Mason Creek Road,
in order to
encourage the
development of a
pedestrian-friendly
“town center”.
o N5.1.23(b). Explore
opportunities to
modify the existing
Tidewater Drive
terminus in order to create a park setting west of Mason Creek Road.
o N5.1.23(c). Improve the entrances to Community Beach Park and Sarah
Constant Park.
o N5.1.23(d). Explore opportunities to provide connections between the
Ocean View Golf Course and Community Beach Park, such as redevelopment
of the “senior center” site.

C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR H OO D S | 3-43
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action N5.1.24. Continue to implement the following actions for the Willoughby
area.
o N5.1.24(a).
Support renovation
of traditional
cottages.
o N5.1.24(b). Revise
development
regulations in the
area south of West
Ocean View
Avenue, restricting
building heights to
no more than three
stories except along
the West Ocean
View Avenue
frontage.
o N5.1.24(c).
Improve the
intersection of
West Ocean View Avenue and 4th View Street.
o N5.1.24(d). Enhance truck movements from the I-64 interchange at 15th
View Street by improving Bayville Street and the intersection of West Ocean
View Avenue and 13th View Street.
o N5.1.24(e). Work with the Navy to evaluate potential reuse opportunities of
the federally-owned land at 4th View Street.

3-44 | C R E A T I N G A N D M A I N T A I N I NG H E A LT HY A ND V I B R A NT N E I G HB OR HO OD S
Revised August 2017

CHAPTER 4: PROVIDING TRANSPORTATION OPTIONS

“A comprehensive transportation system — rare among cities of its size — that
offers a wide variety of choices, while also serving as a regional transportation hub.”

N

orfolk continues to plan for a multi-modal transportation system that will
improve and enhance the safety, mobility, and quality of life for all citizens of
the City. Even though the automobile is expected to continue as the primary
means of commuting, the development of a multi-modal transportation network that
emphasizes public transit, bicycle, and pedestrian facilities can reduce this dependence
and sustain Norfolk’s position as the business, cultural, educational, and medical center
of Hampton Roads.
Norfolk’s network of highways and arterial streets (see Map T-1) is the City’s primary
link to the larger Hampton Roads region, and also the nation. Highways and arterials
generally provide the fastest method of travel and typically have limited accessibility
from neighboring roads, while collector roads (see Map T-2) are used as a connection
between local roads and arterial roads. In support of Norfolk’s future planning and
development goals, maintaining and improving travel along the highway system is a top
priority. Norfolk continues to address roadway congestion and strives to reduce
congestion, particularly during peak travel hours, so that people and goods move as
quickly and efficiently as possible. Norfolk participates fully in the federally-mandated,

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP T-1. EXISTING FEDERAL FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION PRINCIPAL ARTERIALS

4-2 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I O N O P T I ON S
Revised June 2014

MAP T-2. EXISTING FEDERAL FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION MINOR ARTERIALS AND COLLECTOR ROADS

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-3
Revised June 2014

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

regionally-based long range transportation planning
process for urbanized areas which is coordinated
through the Hampton Roads Transportation Planning
Organization (HRTPO).
As part of a balanced transportation network, a
varied mass transportation system is available in the
City of Norfolk. It includes a light rail starter system
running from the Eastern Virginia Medical Center on
the west to the Virginia Beach border on the east, as
well as buses, ferries, services for the disabled, and a
series of programs that support transportation
demand management, including ridesharing.
Planning for pedestrian and bicycle facilities is
directly incorporated into all transportation
improvement programs in Norfolk.
In most
instances, such facilities share rights-of-way with the main streets creating multi-use
corridors. However, opportunities for separate facilities for bicycles and pedestrians are
also considered and endorsed where feasible and appropriate.
The continued ability to move both people and goods efficiently throughout the region
and beyond is important to sustaining Norfolk’s role as the business, cultural,
educational, and medical center of the Hampton Roads region. Norfolk is home to the
region’s major airport facility, Norfolk International Airport, as well as one of the busiest
international ports on the East Coast of the United States and the corporate
headquarters of Norfolk Southern, operating approximately 21,000 miles of rail in the
United States (see Map T-3).

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, the following are key issues involving
transportation in Norfolk:
1.
Addressing roadway congestion, particularly at water crossing facilities.
2.
Expanding light rail transit within the City, as well as regionally, to serve
additional activity and employment centers.
3.
Creating a bicycle and pedestrian network that enhances Norfolk’s multimodal transportation facilities.
4.
Supporting economic development activities through transportation
investments.
5.
Maintaining the efficient connection between the ports and the
roadway/railway networks.
6.
Improving transportation connections.
7.
Maintaining existing roadway networks.
4-4 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I O N O P T I ON S

MAP T-3. PORT AND RAIL FACILITIES

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Enhancing Economic Vitality
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

Transportation Goal 1. Connect residents and visitors with business,
employment, shopping, educational, and activity centers through a safe
and efficient multi-modal regional transportation system.
Outcome T1.1. A street and highway system that allows people and goods to be
moved safely, conveniently, and efficiently.
Metrics:
o Percent of the road network operating at a congestion level of “Low” or
“Moderate.”
o Percent of lane miles of roads exceeding a Pavement Quality
Management (PQM) rating of 60.
Action T1.1.1. Monitor congestion levels and strive for low or moderate congestion
on all roadway segments at peak times and prioritize improvements on those roads
that are rated severe congestion. (see Map T-4).
Comments:

Each roadway segment is classified as having “low,”
“moderate,” or “severe” level of peak period congestion
based on actual travel time data.

4-6 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I O N O P T I ON S
Revised June 2015

MAP T-4. EXISTING AND FUTURE CONGESTION LEVEL OF “SEVERE”

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-7
Revised June 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action T1.1.2. Consider revising the Zoning Ordinance to require submission of a
traffic impact analysis for new projects that are projected to generate over 5,000
new daily trips.
Action T1.1.3. Support efforts to address existing congestion at entry points to the
City through the development of additional bridges and tunnels.
Comments:

Midtown Tunnel expansion and construction of the Patriot’s
Crossing as the first phase of the larger Third Crossing
project are the immediate priorities for implementation.

Action T1.1.4. Optimize the operation of the existing roadway network through
signal timing and technological advances.
Comments:

A system of advanced technologies, known as the Intelligent
Transportation Systems (ITS), is being used to develop
strategies to help reduce traffic congestion, improve
operations, and increase safety on roadways. ITS programs
include methods such as the use of highway variable
message signs, video cameras, on-line communications, and
coordinated traffic signal systems.

Action T1.1.5. Use the Long Range Roadways Improvements Map and Vision 2100 to
assist in decision making on major roadway improvements (see Table T-1 and Map
T-5).

4-8 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I O N O P T I ON S
Revised August 2017

TABLE T-1
COST ESTIMATES – LONG RANGE TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENTS
(AS OF JUNE 2017)
Source: Virginia Department of Transportation, Hampton Roads Transportation
Planning Organization, and Norfolk Department of Public Works

Project
1. Intermodal Connector
2. Patriot’s Crossing
3. I-564/Air Terminal Interchange
4. Hampton Blvd./Terminal Blvd. Grade Separation
5. Midtown Tunnel Expansion/Downtown Tunnel Refurbishment
6. Chesapeake Blvd. Bridge/Lindenwood Connector
7. Military Hwy. Widening (Lowery to Robin Hood)
8. I-64/Norview Ave. Interchange Reconstruction
9. Wesleyan Drive Widening
10. Virginia Beach Boulevard Widening
11. I-64 Westbound to I-264 Eastbound Ramp
12. Tidewater Drive/Little Creek Road
13. I-64/Northampton Boulevard Interchange Modification
14. I-264/Ballentine Boulevard Diverging Diamond Interchange II
15. I-264/Ballentine Boulevard Ramp Modification Phase I
16. Brambleton Avenue Corridor (Intersection Improvements at
Tidewater Drive and Park Avenue)
17. Granby Street Bike Lanes (Lafayette River to Wards Corner)
18. Virginia Beach Boulevard/Newtown Road Intersection
Improvements

Cost Estimate
$189,131,000
$4,224,000,000
$69,000,000
$132,000,000
Complete
n/a
$111,805,000
Complete
Complete
n/a
$157,000,000
Complete
$9,300,000
$7,400,000
$1.700,000
$1,239,500
$822,000
$2,300,000

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-9
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

MAP T-5. LONG RANGE ROADWAY IMPROVEMENTS

4-10 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N S P O R T A T I ON O P T I ON S
Revised August 2017

Action T1.1.6. Coordinate new roadway projects with civic leagues, business
associations, and institutions in order to mitigate roadway construction impacts.
Action T1.1.7. Improve access to neighborhoods and employment centers with
traffic sign and signal enhancements, as well as
roadway
condition
and
intersection
improvements.
Action T1.1.8. Evaluate and implement traffic
calming strategies such as pedestrian bulbouts,
speed bumps, and stop signs, where appropriate,
in conjunction with transportation improvements
or with spot efforts to protect residential areas
and other sensitive land uses from the impacts of
inappropriate volumes of through traffic or
excessive speed.
Action T1.1.9. Evaluate and implement access
management strategies such as reductions in
curb cuts or the addition of medians, where
appropriate, as part of any transportation
improvement or development proposal to
improve traffic operations and safety.
Action T1.1.10. Continue to seek funding for the
implementation of roadway safety improvements
in high crash rate areas and rail crossings.
Action T1.1.11. Ensure roads, bicycle facilities, sidewalks, and bridges are upgraded
and maintained at adequate levels.
Comments:

Roadway maintenance is measured based on a Pavement
Quality Management (PQM) rating system on a scale to 100.
Adequate is determined to be a rating exceeding 60.

Action T1.1.12. Continue to support the use of Traffic Demand Management (TDM)
strategies and programs such as ridesharing, telecommuting, and staggered work
hours to increase the efficiency of existing transportation systems.

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-11
Revised December 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Outcome T1.2.
A comprehensive transit system that promotes efficient
transportation options that are environmentally sensitive.
Metrics:
o Percent change in revenue hours of services for transit systems operating
within Norfolk.
o Percent change in light rail ridership.
Action T1.2.1. Work with Hampton Roads Transit (HRT) to improve transit
connections to major Norfolk employers, such as the Naval Base and hospitals, and
other activity centers, including universities, retail centers, the Virginia Zoo and
Norfolk Botanical Gardens, as well as to Norfolk International Airport, the Port of
Virginia, and other transportation centers.
Comments:

Light rail extension to Naval Station Norfolk is a priority
within the City of Norfolk.

Action T1.2.2. Work with HRT to improve transit service so that it is more
comfortable, convenient, and reliable.
Action T1.2.3. Work with HRT to ensure the
placement of bus shelters at all stops serving at
least 50 passengers a day in order to provide
seating, weather protection, and information to
riders.
Action T1.2.4. Explore the potential for a transit
ridership incentive program that offers reduced
fares and yearly incentive bonus.
Action T1.2.5. Use the Long Range Transit
Improvements Map and Vision 2100 to assist in
decision making on future expansion of light rail,
high speed rail, ferry services, and other modes
(see Map T-6).
Action T1.2.6. Continue planning for a MultiModal Transportation Center at Harbor Park to connect passenger rail, light rail,
regional bus, and ferry services.
Action T1.2.7. Continue seeking State and federal funds to improve and expand the
existing transit network.

4-12 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N S P O R T A T I ON O P T I ON S
Revised August 2017

MAP T-6. LONG RANGE TRANSIT IMPROVEMENTS

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-13

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action T1.2.8. Encourage land use patterns designed to support transit, including
compact, walkable, mixed use developments (see the Identifying Land Use
Strategies chapter).
Outcome T1.3. An expanded pedestrian and bicycle network that promotes
improved public health and provides opportunities for alternative forms of
transportation.
Metrics:
o Percent change in bicycle racks and storage areas.
o Percent change in mileage of bicycle facilities (sharrows, delineated bike
lanes, or multi-use trails).
Action T1.3.1. Implement the Complete Streets Policy (Appendix B) in order to
develop, operate and maintain an integrated, connected network of streets that are
safe and accessible for all people or chosen mode of travel, in a balanced,
responsible and equitable manner consistent
with and supportive of the surrounding
community.
Action T1.3.2. Utilize regulatory standards for
building placement to create pedestrian-oriented
environments in Downtown, the Transit Oriented
Development zoning districts, and designated
Pedestrian Commercial Overlay zoning districts.
Action T1.3.3. Add sidewalks and bicycle facilities
to reduce gaps between segments in established
neighborhoods and developed areas, with
particular focus around schools, hospitals, parks,
and transit stops.

4-14 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N S P O R T A T I ON O P T I ON S
Revised March 2016

MAP T-7. EXISTING AND PROPOSED BICYCLE FACILITIES

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-15
Revised December 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action T1.3.4. Continue to remove obstacles to handicapped accessibility
throughout the City.
Action T1.3.5. Improve pedestrian and bicycle crossings of major streets where
necessary.
Action T1.3.6. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to encourage sustainable travel modes
with provisions for bicycle parking, as well as dedicated parking spots for carpools
and low-energy vehicles, in the design of new facilities.
Action T1.3.7. Develop and maintain a map of safe bicycle routes in the city,
considering the recommendations of Norfolk’s officially designated bicycle advisory
panel and provide the map to entities such as HRT for distribution and inclusion in
city and regional wayfinding materials.
Action T1.3.8. Continue to fund and implement the recommendations of the City of
Norfolk Bicycle and Pedestrian Strategic Plan (Appendix B).
Action T1.3.9. Implement recommended proposed bicycle facilities from the bicycle
facilities map (Map T-7) in conjunction with any transportation improvements in the
identified corridors and also through stand-alone programs and funds made
available for such purposes.

Action T1.3.10. Seek funding from State and federal sources to aid implementation
of the bicycle map (Map T-7) recommendations with priority given to the proposed
strategic corridors.
Action T1.3.11. Work with neighboring jurisdictions to ensure that bicycle facilities
extend across boundaries where feasible.
Action T1.3.12. Ensure bicycle facilities are adequately maintained.
Action T1.3.13. Encourage, among motorists and bicyclists alike, a culture of respect
and shared usage by developing informational materials and programs to be

4-16 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N S P O R T A T I ON O P T I ON S
Revised January 2018

distributed and made available in a variety of formats to help educate cyclists and
drivers about the rights and responsibilities of cyclists and drivers in Virginia.
Action T1.3.14. Provide additional training for police in order to increase
enforcement of laws related to pedestrians and bicyclists.
Action T1.3.15. Continue to support early education and access to bicycle and
pedestrian options through programs such as Safe Routes to School.
Action T1.3.16. Continue to explore the feasibility of reusing former rail lines and
former or underutilized rights-of-way for trails and connections.
Action T1.3.17. Explore innovative programs that offer expanded transportation
choices, such as bicycle or car share, in Norfolk and in cooperation with other
jurisdictions and institutions.

Transportation Goal 2.
Support the continued development of
transportation linkages connecting Norfolk to the larger region, nation,
and world.
Outcome T2.1. Improved and increased regional, national, and international
connections for both people and goods.
Metrics:
o Percent change in airport passenger enplanements.
o Percent change in rail and port cargo volumes.
o Percent change in intercity rail passenger volumes.
o Percent change in commuting times.
Action T2.1.1. Support development of the Multi-Modal Transportation Center at
Harbor Park to connect passenger rail, light rail, regional bus, and ferry services.

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-17
Revised December 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action T2.1.2. Evaluate the inclusion of multi-modal options in all planning for new
facilities crossing the waters surrounding the City.
Comments:

Midtown Tunnel expansion and construction of the Patriot’s
Crossing as the first phase of the larger Third Crossing
project are the immediate priorities for implementation.

Action T2.1.3. Cooperate with State and regional officials on improvements to the
highway network linking Norfolk to the region and the nation.
Action T2.1.4. Support improvements at congested key entrance points to Norfolk
to reinforce the City’s role as the historic and economic center of Hampton Roads.
Action T2.1.5. Support the maintenance and potential expansion of intercity bus
services connecting to Norfolk.
Action T2.1.6. Support the re-establishment of intercity passenger rail service to
Norfolk with increased service frequencies above the initial single daily train that is
currently proposed.
Action T2.1.7. Support the establishment of high speed passenger rail service in the
US Route 460 corridor.
Action T2.1.8. Support the implementation of the Norfolk International Airport
Master Plan to ensure its continued role as the primary air travel facility for the
Hampton Roads region, while also working to protect its unique natural
environment and setting.
Action T2.1.9. Support the implementation of the Virginia Port Authority’s Master
Plan for Norfolk International Terminals, while also working to ensure that the
overall impacts of port operations on adjacent communities are mitigated.

4-18 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N S P O R T A T I ON O P T I ON S
Revised December 2015

Action T2.1.10. Pursue a sustainable multimodal freight system that facilitates the
efficient movement of freight and people, supports a thriving economy, and protects
the natural and human environment.
Action T2.1.11. Evaluate the impact of individual land use decisions on the capacity
of significant freight movement routes and corridors.
Action T2.1.12.
Support the implementation of harbor channel and rail
improvement projects that could serve to increase cargo traffic through Norfolk.

P R OV I D I N G T R A N SP OR T A T I ON O P T I O N S | 4-19
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

4-20 | P R O V I D I N G T R A N S P O R T A T I ON O P T I ON S
Revised December 2015

CHAPTER 5: ENHANCING ECONOMIC VITALITY

“A healthy economy that provides varied employment opportunities for a welltrained workforce, a world class port, a strong military presence, with a vibrant
Downtown and thriving commercial centers throughout the City.”

N

orfolk has historically been the business, cultural, educational, and medical
center of the Hampton Roads region. It continues to be so today. The City is
home to the world’s largest naval base, one of the busiest international ports
on the East Coast of the United States and one of the largest coal exporting terminals, in
terms of tonnage, in the world. Commerce in Norfolk is supported by the region’s major
airport facility, Norfolk International Airport.
Norfolk’s cultural role is enriched by the presence of the Virginia Arts Festival, the
Virginia Opera, the Virginia Stage Company, and the Virginia Symphony Orchestra, as
well as supporting facilities such as the Attucks Theatre, the Wells Theatre, the Harrison
Opera House, Chrysler Hall, and Norfolk Scope Arena. Norfolk also hosts the Chrysler
Museum, home to a world-renowned glass collection. Norfolk State University, Old
Dominion University, Virginia Wesleyan College, and Tidewater Community College
support the City’s role as the educational center of the region. Norfolk is also home to
four hospitals, Sentara Norfolk General Hospital, Children’s Hospital of the King’s
Daughters, Sentara Leigh Hospital, and DePaul Medical Center, as well as Eastern
Virginia Medical School.

E N H A NC I NG E C O NOM I C V I T A LI T Y | 5-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Examination of employment indicates that Norfolk has a greater percentage of jobs in
the services (including healthcare), federal civilian, and military employment sectors
than the region (see Table EV-1).
TABLE EV-1
EMPLOYMENT IN NORFOLK AND THE REGION
Source: 2009 Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2009

6,592
6,928
13,036
9,119
3,092

Percent
of Total
3.1%
3.3%
6.1%
4.3%
1.5%

60,078
56,460
112,493
NA
15,323

Percent
of Total
5.4%
5.1%
10.2%
NA
1.4%

13,098

6.2%

88,218

8.0%

67,785
15,258
50,847
7,527
14,222
212,974

31.8%
7.2%
23.9%
3.5%
6.7%
100.0%

296,815
49,889
99,789
NA
NA
1,108,092

26.8%
4.5%
9.0%
NA
NA
100.0%

Norfolk
Construction
Manufacturing
Retail Trade
Transportation/Warehousing
Information
Finance, Insurance, Real
Estate
Services
Federal Civilian
Military
State government
Local government
TOTAL JOBS

Region

The Department of Development has created a Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy for Norfolk, identifying a series of goals for economic development. This
strategy identifies the following business clusters that drive additional economic
development and create new capabilities, new companies, and new businesses:
Maritime and Transportation Business Cluster; Technology Business Cluster; Retail and
Commercial Business Cluster; and Finance and Business Services Cluster. Most of these
industries have played and will continue to play a major role in Norfolk’s development,
especially Maritime and Transportation, while others, such as Technology Business
Cluster, will assist Norfolk in the future.

5-2 | E N H A N CI N G E CO N OM I C V I T A L I T Y

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, the following are the key issues involving
Norfolk’s economy:
1. Reinvesting, reusing, or redeveloping properties to enable economic
development since Norfolk is a mature, developed city.
2. Supporting or enhancing existing assets and competitive advantages, such as the
military, port, university facilities, and the “renewable” labor force they
represent, in order to maximize economic development potential.
3. Investing in lifelong learning to promote economic vitality.
4. Improving and expanding regional transportation linkages, including highway,
bridge, and tunnel infrastructure, as well as multi-modal connections (see the
Providing Transportation Options chapter for more on this topic).

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Providing Transportation Options
o Supporting Lifelong Learning
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Enjoying Daily Life
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

Economic Vitality Goal 1. Enhance economic health and increase
employment opportunities through business retention and expansion and
business attraction.
Outcome EV1.1. An enhanced environment and resources to support business
expansion and investment.
Metrics:
o Percent change in the value of building permits for commercial
investment.
o Percent change in the average amount of time required for development
approvals.
Action EV1.1.1. Support the intensification of land use in the Strategic Economic
Development Areas (see Map EV-1) that have infrastructure capacity and access
(including transit) and underutilized land based on its economic value.

E N H A NC I NG E C O NOM I C V I T A LI T Y | 5-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP EV-1. STRATEGIC ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AREAS

5-4 | E N H A N CI N G E CO N OM I C V I T A L I T Y

Action EV1.1.2. Invest in infrastructure to attract and maintain businesses (see the
Providing Transportation Options, Delivering Quality Community Services, and
Enjoying Daily Life chapters).
Action EV1.1.3.
Explore creative financing
resources, such as Tax Increment Financing and
Business Improvement Districts, for economic
development activities.
Action EV1.1.4. Continue to encourage the
revitalization of Norfolk’s commercial corridors
and nodes by improving public infrastructure and
promoting available grant funding for aesthetic
improvements of commercial properties.
Action EV1.1.5. Enhance the viability of Norfolk’s
commercial corridors and nodes by exploring
options for creating parking.
Action EV1.1.6.
Continue to support the
designation of Norfolk as an Enterprise Zone as
well as the hosting of several Historically Underutilized Business Zones (HUBzone) to
allow Norfolk businesses to have access to the financial and tax incentives provided
by these programs.
Action EV1.1.7. Continue to support the Norfolk Economic Development Authority’s
(EDA) efforts to provide assistance to eligible businesses.
Comments:

The EDA was created by the City to acquire, own, lease, and
dispose of properties to promote industry and induce
businesses to locate and remain in Norfolk. The EDA is
authorized to issue revenue bonds to finance facilities for
non-profits, manufacturers, and businesses in an Enterprise
or Empowerment Zone.
It also evaluates potential
performance based grants for projects with significant
capital investment and job creation and grants for website
development and engineering assistance for businesses.

Action EV1.1.8. Provide technical assistance to businesses by guiding them through
city processes, hosting education and training workshops on how to start or expand
a business, and coordinating financial options.

E N H A NC I NG E C O NOM I C V I T A LI T Y | 5-5
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action EV1.1.9. Evaluate the impact of city processes on doing business, including
zoning, permitting, and other requirements, and modify where appropriate to
support business investment.
Action EV1.1.10. Expand online City services to include permitting.
Action EV1.1.11. When evaluating proposals to implement tolls or to modify fees,
consider the impact of the changes on existing and future businesses and potential
investment.
Action EV1.1.12. Update the Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy
(CEDS) at least every 10 years to ensure that the City remains current in its economic
development efforts and is able to respond to shifting macroeconomic trends.
Action EV1.1.13. Continue to pursue major corporate headquarters.
Action EV1.1.14. Continue to evaluate economic opportunities, including Strategic
Economic Development areas, utilizing Vision 2100 and other applicable plans and
studies.
Action EV1.1.15. Analyze potential City and NRHA land sales and acquisitions in
terms of their ability to be transformative or advance resilience goals, using Vision
2100 for guidance.
Action EV1.2.16. Continue to support Norfolk’s “working waterfronts,” utilizing
zoning and other tools, to strengthen and protect waterfront commerce.
Comments:

Working waterfronts are areas or structures on, over, or
adjacent to navigable bodies of water that provide access to
the water and are used for water-dependent commercial,
industrial, or government activities, including commercial
fishing, recreational fishing, tourism, aquaculture, boat and
ship building, boat and ship repair, boat and ship services,
seafood processing, seafood sales, transportation, shipping,
marine construction, military activities and other water
dependent uses.

Outcome EV1.2. Expanded economic activity that capitalizes on Norfolk’s locational
advantages and economic assets.
Metrics:
o Percent growth in jobs in Norfolk in comparison to region, state, and
nation.

5-6 | E N H A N CI N G E CO N OM I C V I T A L I T Y
Revised August 2017

o Percent change in the number of business licenses issued.
o Percent change in median household income.
o Percent change in the tonnage/TEU’s (twenty-foot equivalent units) of
material through the port.
Action EV1.2.1. Forge a closer relationship with the military to capitalize on its
presence in Norfolk and capture more exiting military personnel by coordinating
long term comprehensive planning with the Navy.

Action EV1.2.2. Continue coordinating with the Virginia Port Authority in long range
planning, including intermodal infrastructure advances and improvements, to
support Norfolk’s role as the leader in the maritime industry.
Action EV1.2.3. Capitalize on opportunities for additional port-related investment,
including import-export firms.

Action EV1.2.4. Coordinate long range planning with the universities, colleges, and
medical institutions to attract spinoff investment in research and development and
provide opportunities for training.
Action EV1.2.5. Support and promote Downtown Norfolk as the business, financial,
and cultural center of the Hampton Roads region through continued marketing and
recruitment activities.

E N H A NC I NG E C O NOM I C V I T A LI T Y | 5-7
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action EV1.2.6. Develop a plan to ensure the continued vitality of Norfolk’s historic
waterfront, capitalizing on its role as an
economic catalyst.
Action EV1.2.7. Support the implementation of
the Norfolk International Airport Master Plan.
Action EV1.2.8. Support the efforts of the
Norfolk Convention and Visitors Bureau to
promote Norfolk as a tourist, boating, and
convention destination.
Action EV1.2.9. Encourage the marketing of
Norfolk’s beaches and the beachfront
communities.
Action EV1.2.10. Promote the Half Moone Cruise
and Celebration Center as a gateway for cruise
ships as well as a venue for events.
Action EV1.2.11. Work with other jurisdictions in
the region to develop and market a regional
approach to tourism and convention promotion
and facility planning.
Action EV1.2.12. Continue to recognize the importance of the arts as an economic
tool by coordinating with and promoting the activities of arts organizations such as
the Virginia Arts Festival, the Virginia Opera, the Virginia Stage Company, the Norfolk
Botanical Garden, and the Virginia Symphony Orchestra (see the Enjoying Daily Life
chapter).
Action EV1.2.13. Support the recruitment and expansion of “Green” businesses and
manufacturers (see the Promoting Environmental Sustainability chapter).
Comments:

State and federal initiatives aimed at creating offshore
wind-energy sites off the coast of Virginia present supply
chain opportunities for Norfolk and other municipalities.

Action EV1.2.14. Encourage Norfolk’s water supply surplus to be marketed and
utilized as a major regional asset to attract development.

5-8 | E N H A N CI N G E CO N OM I C V I T A L I T Y
Revised August 2017

Outcome EV1.3. Lifelong learning opportunities that are responsive to changing
economic needs.
Metrics:
o Reduction in the number of people who live in poverty.
o Change in high school graduation rate.
Action EV1.3.1. Work with educational partners, both within and outside of Norfolk,
including universities, colleges, and trade schools, to tailor their educational
programs to the changing opportunities presented by Norfolk’s economy (see the
Supporting Lifelong Learning and Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation
chapters).
Action EV1.3.2. Support Norfolk Public Schools in efforts to provide both collegetrack and trade education that is responsive to economic opportunities (see the
Supporting Lifelong Learning chapter).
Action EV1.3.3. Identify and provide opportunities for career training and
development of Norfolk residents that can lead to jobs in Norfolk industries (see the
Supporting Lifelong Learning chapter).
Action EV1.3.4. Ensure that updates to the CEDS reflect the importance of the City’s
higher education and institutional partners as engines of economic development.

E N H A NC I NG E C O NOM I C V I T A LI T Y | 5-9
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

5-10 | E N H A N CI N G E C ON OM I C V I T A LI T Y
Revised August 2017

CHAPTER 6: PROMOTING ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY

“A sustainable environment that is not simply protected, but enhanced.”

N

orfolk possesses a diversity of environmental resources that improve the
quality of life for its residents. Natural resources extend along its Chesapeake
Bay beaches and dunes and in its rivers and wetlands. City parks, recreational
fields, open green spaces, and even street trees are the fabric that connects the natural
spaces.
Norfolk has an estimated 144 miles of shoreline and approximately 750 acres of
wetlands. The City is virtually surrounded by water; the Bay, rivers, and tidal creeks that
comprise this water provide aquatic ecosystems and have historical significance. They
also provide recreational boating, fishing, and bird watching opportunities, sustain
marine commerce, and serve as aesthetic amenities, adding beauty, value, and quality
of life to Norfolk’s neighborhoods.
Development pressures and maritime and commercial interests, combined with a large
military presence, have led to the loss of a significant percentage of Norfolk’s historic
tidal wetlands. Today, however, tidal wetlands are recognized as a valuable resource,

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
for their inherent value in flood control, water quality enhancement, and wildlife
habitat, and as an aesthetic resource that improves the quality of life for all citizens.
Norfolk has taken a leadership role in promoting and
implementing new shoreline stabilization techniques
using native vegetation and has completed 33
wetland restoration projects with various community
partners such as the Lafayette River Partnership and
the Elizabeth River Project (see Map ES-3).
There are approximately seven miles of dune and
beach habitat fronting the Chesapeake Bay within
the City. These areas are under constant attack from
normal wave activity, in addition to storm events.
Man-made disturbances to the dune system also
threaten beach stability. Invasive plant species have
been found on the beaches, threatening the habitat
value provided by native species.
A tree canopy currently covers 33% of Norfolk’s land
area. This tree canopy offers many benefits,
including the conservation of energy – through the
reduction of temperatures by providing shade – and
the reduction of air pollution. It also provides
wildlife habitat, social and educational opportunities,
and aesthetic benefits. Threats to Norfolk’s tree
canopy include disease, harmful insects, aging trees, and the unnecessary removal of
trees. In order to offset these threats, the City strives to diversify tree species, replace
aging trees, and enforce regulations that protect trees.
Given Norfolk’s location on the coast, the natural environment also presents challenges
in the form of floods, hurricanes, and other natural hazards. Map ES-1 illustrates the
areas of the City that the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has
determined are in flood zones, while Map ES-2 shows the potential storm surge impact
of hurricanes by storm category. The City participates in the National Flood Insurance
Program which offers flood insurance to homeowners, renters, and business owners.
Norfolk has also adopted regulations to help reduce the impact of flooding. However,
potential sea level rise and other gradual and catastrophic natural events call for
additional measures.
Pursuing environmental sustainability, meeting the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their needs, is the key to
preserving the natural environment and preparing for potential risks posed by natural
events. In addition to actions that protect and enhance the environment, actions are
6-2 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I L I T Y

needed to conserve resources and reduce the overall impact of the built environment
on the natural environment. Norfolk is taking steps in this direction by utilizing “Green”
building practices in several recent city projects, including Lamberts Point Recreation
Center and Crossroads Elementary School, and pursuing energy-saving initiatives in City
facilities. In addition, Norfolk is promoting sustainability in the private sector through
Green Vision Norfolk, a city initiative to promote programs and educate residents about
the importance of energy conservation.

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, the following are the key issues involving
environmental sustainability in Norfolk:
1. Protecting and improving the City’s waters, including the Chesapeake Bay.
2. Protecting Norfolk’s other natural resources.
3. Preparing for the consequences of natural hazards.
4. Incorporating sustainability into daily living.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Providing Transportation Options
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Enjoying Daily Life
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP ES-1. FEMA FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP

6-4 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I L I T Y
Revised January 2017

MAP ES-2. STORM SURGE

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Environmental Sustainability Goal 1.
resources.

Ensure high quality natural

Outcome ES1.1. Enhanced water quality in the City’s waterways and reservoirs,
including the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries.
Metrics:
o Change in the number of days Norfolk beaches are posted for health
warnings or closed.
o Change in the extent of open oyster harvest conditions for all practical
reaches of the City’s rivers.
o Change in the land area of wetland and shoreline restoration projects.
Action ES1.1.1. Reaffirm the City of Norfolk Chesapeake Bay Preservation Area
Program Supplement (see Appendix B), adopted by Norfolk City Council on March
11, 2003.
Comments:

The City amended the 1992 General Plan to assist in meeting
all mandated requirements set forth in the Chesapeake Bay
Preservation Act, enacted by the Virginia General Assembly
in 1988.

Action ES1.1.2. Revise metrics for water quality based on meeting Total Maximum
Daily Load (TMDL) standards, once established.
Action ES1.1.3. Continue to work with research institutions, such as Old Dominion
University and the Virginia Institute of Marine Science, and environmental
organizations, such as the Elizabeth River Project and the Chesapeake Bay
Foundation, to improve water quality in Norfolk waterways.

6-6 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I L I T Y
Revised June 2014

Action ES1.1.4. Support implementation of the Lafayette River Watershed Master
Plan.
Comments:

The master plan calls for making the Lafayette River
swimmable by 2014 and restoring open oyster harvest
conditions by 2020 (the Virginia Department of Health
currently prohibits shellfish harvesting from the Lafayette
River).

Action ES1.1.5.
Develop and implement a
stormwater master plan.
Action ES1.1.6. Encourage the use of Best
Management Practices (BMPs) reflective of
Norfolk’s urban character in order to reduce and
filter stormwater runoff.
Action ES1.1.7.
Consider revisions to
development regulations to require enhanced
on-site storage and filtration of stormwater for
larger developments.
Action ES1.1.8.
Incorporate bio-retention
facilities, such as rain gardens, in municipal
landscaping for passive treatment of stormwater
using native plant species.
Comments:

The City has installed rain gardens at the Lamberts Point
Recreation Center and the Ernie Morgan Environmental
Action Center and supported the creation of the Knitting Mill
Creek Community Gardens on unimproved City right-of-way.

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-7

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action ES1.1.9. Encourage State action to update the Virginia Erosion and Sediment
Control Handbook to recognize advances in erosion and sediment control
techniques.
Comments:

The Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation
published the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control
Handbook in 1992 to provide guidance for all State erosion
and sediment control programs. It covers basic concepts,
measure design, installation, maintenance, plan review
procedures, and administrative guidelines to support
compliance with the Virginia Erosion and Sediment Control
Law and Regulations.

Action ES1.1.10. Increase the extent of natural areas along the waterfront, using
shoreline restoration projects such as living shorelines, and consider incentives that
could encourage their use.
Comments:

Shoreline restoration projects on public property can serve
as a model, providing training, guidance, and assistance to
private property owners, for the restoration of shorelines on
private property (see Map ES-3).

Action ES1.1.11. Develop criteria for defining environmentally sensitive areas that
can be mapped to assist in selecting locations for shoreline restoration projects.

6-8 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I L I T Y

MAP ES-3. CITY WETLAND RESTORATION PROJECTS

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-9

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action ES1.1.12. Work with community partners to explore potential designation of
Norfolk’s waterways as “No Discharge Zones.”
Comments:

No Discharge Zones are water bodies into which the
discharge of sewage from all vessels is completely
prohibited. This designation, assigned by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), must be applied for by the State
following determination that the body of water requires
greater protection than current federal standards allow.

Action ES1.1.13. Encourage all marinas in Norfolk to seek designation as “Virginia
Clean Marinas.”
Comments:

The intent of Virginia Clean Marina Program is to provide
technical assistance and educate marina operators and
boaters on ways to maintain water quality and protect living
resources by addressing issues such as unchecked
stormwater runoff, drips from fuel docks, discharges from
marine heads, and fish waste. Marinas that adequately
address these issues are identified as “Virginia Clean
Marinas”. Ten marinas in Norfolk have received this
designation as of 2011 (see Map ES-4).

6-10 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I N A B I L I T Y

MAP ES-4. VIRGINIA CLEAN MARINAS

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-11

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action ES1.1.14. Continue support of Hampton Roads Sanitation District (HRSD) and
City of Norfolk improvements to the wastewater and stormwater systems (see the
Delivering Quality Community Services chapter).
Action ES1.1.15. Install and maintain animal waste clean-up stations at community
centers, beaches, schoolyards, and other community gathering places.
Action ES1.1.16. Continue public outreach and education regarding the responsible
use of fertilizer, proper disposal of animal waste, and other potential water quality
improvement actions.
Outcome ES1.2. Clean, healthy air that supports plant, animal, aquatic, and human
life.
Metrics:
o Change in the number of days in which air quality measures exceed
minimum standards.
Action ES1.2.1. Support the development of a regional greenhouse gas emissions
inventory and emission reduction targets.
Action ES1.2.2. Support regional efforts to
increase travel by alternative modes, including
the development of “Complete Streets” (see the
Providing Transportation Options chapter).
Action ES1.2.3. Encourage the use of alternative
commuting patterns such as remote workplace
opportunities.
Action ES1.2.4.
Implement policies that
discourage vehicle idling periods greater than
five minutes in any hour, and encourage similar
improvements in the private sector.
Action ES1.2.5. Acquire City equipment and
vehicles that utilize alternative fuels or exhibit
high fuel efficiency, when feasible, in order to
reduce carbon emissions.

6-12 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I N A B I L I T Y

Outcome ES1.3. An ecosystem that supports a diversity of plant and animal life.
Metrics:
o Percent change in tree canopy coverage.
o Change in areal extent of dunes planted.
Action ES1.3.1. Increase the quantity, density, and diversity of trees to achieve a
goal of 40% tree canopy cover through a combination of regulatory actions and Cityprovided trees.
Comments:

The City has augmented its street tree planting program
with the Celebrate Trees Project as a way to increase tree
cover, including establishing Living Legacy Groves in
designated public parks or open spaces and encouraging
residents and businesses to plant trees on private property
in celebration of meaningful events. Living Legacy Groves
have been established at Lakewood Park, Lafayette Park and
Poplar Hall Park, with plans to expand the program to other
areas in the City.

Action ES1.3.2. Revise landscaping regulations to require the placement of shade
trees in parking lots.
Comments:

This can serve to reduce the effect of reflected energy on
temperatures (the urban heat island effect), as well as
increase the tree canopy cover and reduce the amount of
paved surface.

Action ES1.3.3. Encourage the use of native species, for sustainability and drought
resistance purposes, wherever possible.

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-13

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action ES1.3.4. Encourage developers to preserve, to the greatest extent possible,
existing, non-invasive trees, especially larger ones.
Action ES1.3.5.
ecosystems.
Comments:

Identify and control invasive species that threaten natural

Phragmites is an invasive wetland plant common in Norfolk
and beach vitex have been discovered on Norfolk dunes.

Action ES1.3.6. Encourage connections of open green spaces throughout the City
through the development of pedestrian and bicycle corridors.
Action ES1.3.7. Implement the Sand Management Plan (SMP) Guidance Document
(Appendix B) to promote sand dune and beach stability, functionality, and resiliency
while promoting the economic vitality and ecological resiliency of the Ocean View
urban beach community and recognizing that the bayfront has a variety of distinct
physical and geographic characteristics, each with unique preservation and
maintenance issues.
Action ES1.3.7. Ensure that former waste disposal sites are safe while continuing to
explore suitable reuse options.
Action ES1.3.8. Promote soil management best practices that enhance stormwater
infiltration capacity.
Action ES1.3.9. Support the recruitment and expansion of “Green” businesses and
manufacturers (see the Enhancing Economic Vitality chapter).
Comments:

State and federal initiatives aimed at creating offshore
wind-energy sites off the coast of Virginia present supply
chain opportunities for Norfolk and other municipalities.

6-14 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I N A B I L I T Y
Revised January 2018

Environmental Sustainability Goal 2. Prepare for the consequences of
natural hazards.
Outcome ES2.1. Reduced risk and increased resilience to gradual and catastrophic
natural events.
Metrics:
o Percent of properties in flood zone that do not receive a variance to waive
requirements related to flood protection.
o Area of wetland restoration projects.
o Change in FEMA Community Rating System evaluation.
o Percent of new properties developed outside of floodplains and high
storm surge areas.
Action ES2.1.1. Evaluate the impact of potential sea level rise when reviewing
development proposals and in the preparation of budgets, using Vision 2100 as a
guide.

Action ES2.1.2. Promote growth in the least hazard-prone areas, as determined by
the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (Map ES-1), the Storm Surge Map (Map ES-2),
the Noise and Accident Potential Zones Map (Map LU-4), and other emerging
datasets identifying potential sea level rise, land subsidence, and other hazards.
Action ES2.1.3. Revise development regulations to respond to the impact of
potential sea level rise.
Comments:

Several research and technical assistance resources related
to sea level rise are available, including those provided by

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-15
Revised January 2018

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Old Dominion University and the Virginia Institute of Marine
Science.
Action ES2.1.4. Continue to monitor changes in tide data and its effect on flooding
throughout the City.
Action ES2.1.5. Evaluate options to mitigate the impact of natural hazards, including
flooding, using the Hampton Roads Hazard Mitigation Plan and Vision 2100 as
guides.
Action ES2.1.6. Develop a stormwater master plan that includes consideration of
issues of water volumes and rates of discharge.
Action ES2.1.7. Continue to implement wetland
design changes, such as the use of living
shorelines that allow for the landward migration
of wetlands, for resilience to sea level rise.
Action ES2.1.8. Improve the City’s rating in the
National Flood Insurance Program’s Community
Rating System (CRS) (see Ensuring Housing
Choices for All chapter).
Action ES2.1.9. Create incentives to encourage
developments to be built higher than the
minimum Base Flood Elevation (BFE) in mapped
flood hazard areas and above grade elsewhere in
the City.
Action ES2.1.10. Ensure that all new development in designated flood-prone areas
complies with the City’s flood protection regulations (see Ensuring Housing Choices
for All chapter).
Action ES2.1.11. Determine the appropriate strategies to mitigate the impact of
flooding to existing flood-prone structures.
Comments:

Options include elevating, acquiring, relocating or otherwise
retrofitting structures.

Action ES2.1.12. Ensure that residents and property owners in flood prone areas are
notified of the threat to their properties (see Ensuring Housing Choices for All
chapter).

6-16 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I N A B I L I T Y
Revised January 2018

Action ES2.1.13. Identify areas of the City that are particularly susceptible to
inundation and develop a communication strategy to notify residents in advance of
and during flood events.
Action ES2.1.14. Continue to participate in the development and implementation of
the Hampton Roads Hazard Mitigation Plan to address potential hazards on a
regional basis.

Environmental Sustainability Goal 3. Incorporate sustainability into daily
living.
Outcome ES3.1. Reduced energy consumption due to the application of energy
efficient design features and technologies.
Metrics:
o Percent change in energy use per square foot of city facilities.
o Percent change in the number of LEED or Energy Star buildings.
Action ES3.1.1. Develop criteria for constructing new city facilities to LEED or ICC
International Green Construction Code standards.
Comments:

LEED supports the adoption of sustainable “Green” building
and development practices through rating systems that
recognize projects that implement strategies for better
environmental and health performance. ICC International
Green Construction Code is a model code focused on
“Green” building design and performance.

Action ES3.1.2. Develop criteria for applying LEED Existing Building standards to
renovations and rehabilitations of City facilities.
Comments:

The LEED for Existing Buildings Rating System helps building
owners and operators measure operations, improvements
and maintenance on a consistent scale, with the goal of
maximizing operational efficiency while minimizing
environmental impacts.

Action ES3.1.3. Promote the use of alternative energy through supportive code
changes to permit and require the use of new technologies, such as solar and wind
power, while ensuring such technologies are compatible in established residential
areas.

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-17
Revised January 2018

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action ES3.1.4. Identify city-owned properties where alternative energy sources
could be utilized.
Action ES3.1.5. Promote “Green” municipal projects as models for the private
sector.
Action ES3.1.6. Promote the use of “Green” building technologies, including
weatherization, to provide energy conservation benefits through programs such as
the Norfolk Green Home Choice Program (see the Ensuring Housing Choices for All
chapter).
Comments:

The Green Home Choice Program is a voluntary certification
program that educates occupants about a home’s
environmental attributes, with the goal of sustainable home
design.

Action ES3.1.7. Continue to offer incentives to encourage energy efficient design
and building, while evaluating the feasibility of additional incentives for both new
construction and renovation projects.
Comments:

Norfolk currently offers expedited permitting for
construction under the Green Home Choice Program. Other
jurisdictions have adopted other incentives such as energy
efficient real estate tax credits.

Action ES3.1.8. Continue to monitor changes in technology and legislation to
identify opportunities for implementing new “Green” building programs and
enhancing existing ones.
Action ES3.1.9. Encourage the use of design features such as shade, skylights,
operable windows, or vegetation placed appropriately to promote resilience and
potentially allow occupancy during times of recovery.
Outcome ES3.2. Residents who take responsibility for reducing their impact on the
environment and take steps towards improving it.
Metrics:
o Percent change in total solid waste generated, composted, and recycled.
o Change in land area dedicated to community gardens.
Action ES3.2.1. Continue to offer, or sponsor in cooperation with local institutions,
environmental education and volunteer stewardship opportunities.

6-18 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I N A B I L I T Y
Revised January 2018

Comments:

Examples of environmental stewardship efforts include the
Elizabeth River Project’s Star Homes program, the
Chesapeake Bay Foundation’s oyster gardening program
and the Lafayette River Partnership’s wetland restoration
activities.

Action ES3.2.2. Encourage the use of “environmentally-friendly” building practices,
such as green roofs, cool/white roofs and pervious pavers, in private development.
Action ES3.2.3. Adopt energy-efficient outdoor light standards to reduce overlighting of development sites, including requirements to turn off outdoor lighting,
other than security lighting, after hours of operation.
Action ES3.2.4. Continue to support and promote household waste recycling
opportunities in both single family and multifamily housing and evaluate potential
changes to yard waste disposal practices.

Action ES3.2.5. Encourage citizens, neighborhoods, and businesses to take a larger
role in cleaning and maintaining public spaces.
Action ES3.2.6. Promote the reuse of water through strategies such as rain barrels,
rain gardens, and grey water recycling.
Comments:

Grey water recycling is the reuse of water collected from
sinks, showers, bathtubs, washing machines and
dishwashers for irrigation, toilet flushing and other reuse
options.

Action ES3.2.7. Support the development of community gardens on vacant or
underutilized parcels as a way to encourage urban agriculture.
Action ES3.2.8. Encourage the provision of independent back-up sources of power to
be used when primary power source is interrupted for an extended period.

P R OM OT I N G E NV I R O NM E NT A L S U ST A I NA B I LI T Y | 6-19
Revised January 2018

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

6-20 | P R OM OT I N G E N V I R O N M E NT A L S U ST A I N A B I L I T Y
Revised August 2016

CHAPTER 7: ENSURING HOUSING CHOICES FOR ALL

“A variety of well-maintained housing options
that are affordable and accessible to all residents.”

N

orfolk is home to an estimated 95,018 housing units, ranging from downtown
efficiency rentals to riverfront estates. Of the 86,485 occupied housing units,
45% are owner occupied and 55% are renter occupied. Just under half (49.1%)
of the housing units in Norfolk are single family detached units, with the next largest
percentage (11.8%) comprised of structures with 5 to 9 units.
Norfolk’s housing stock is older than that of most other cities in the region, with 77% at
least 30 years of age and 65% at least 50 years old. Deterioration of older housing is a
direct threat to the stability of many of Norfolk’s low income neighborhoods that is
exacerbated by absentee landlords and limited financial resources available to residents
for maintenance and repairs.
The City has historically engaged in a series of programs addressing housing quality,
ranging from loans and grants to repair residential properties to demolition of blighted
properties. The City has partnered with the Norfolk Redevelopment and Housing
Authority (NRHA) to implement redevelopment, conservation, and special service
district programs in various neighborhoods (see Map HC-1).

E NSU R I N G H O U S I NG C H OI CE S F OR A L L | 7-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP HC-1. REDEVELOPMENT, CONSERVATION AND SPECIAL SERVICE DISTRICTS

7-2 | E N SU R I N G H OU S I N G C HO I CE S F OR A L L

The focus for redevelopment areas is blight removal
and new development, typically accomplished
through acquisition, demolition, and new
construction. The focus of conservation areas is
rehabilitation, facilitated by home improvement
loans and grants and home buyer assistance. The
City has also developed special service districts, in
response to changes in state law regarding
redevelopment and conservation activities, to
provide housing rehabilitation loans and grants in
targeted communities.
Since 2001, through the implementation of the
Strategic
Improvement
Plan
for
Norfolk’s
Neighborhoods, the City has focused significant
resources on how to make Norfolk’s housing stock
more attractive, and neighborhoods more
competitive in the regional real estate market. Many
properties have been rehabilitated and updated to
add modern conveniences and amenities that
support today’s lifestyles and have been effective in
retaining and attracting residents.
Housing affordability continues to be a priority for the City, for both renters and
homeowners.
The City and NRHA are pursuing affordable homeownership
opportunities in areas such as Broad Creek and on 26 th Street in Lamberts Point. The
City has partnered with the Old Dominion University Community Development
Corporation (ODU-CDC) to create affordable homeownership opportunities on 43rd
Street as well. In addition, the City and NRHA continue to support affordable rental
housing opportunities with the development of new apartments in Broad Creek and the
renovation of Mission College Apartments, as well as through the provision of over
3,600 public housing units and 3,500 housing choice vouchers.

E NSU R I N G H O U S I NG C H OI CE S F OR A L L | 7-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Meeting the housing goals of Norfolk’s special needs population is one of the most
challenging issues facing Norfolk, as is the case in many communities. Special needs
populations are defined as the chronically homeless, the elderly, the disabled, extremely
low income households (earning 30% or less of the area median income), those with
chronic physical and mental disabilities, domestic violence victims, and those with
HIV/AIDS. These are the most vulnerable populations in the city, needing not only
housing solutions but varying intensities of supportive services.

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, following are the key issues involving housing
in Norfolk:
1. Making Norfolk’s housing stock more attractive and competitive in the regional
real estate market.
2. Ensuring that housing is affordable for renters and homeowners.
3. Meeting the housing needs of Norfolk’s special needs populations.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability

Housing Choices Goal 1. Ensure housing of high quality and sustainability.
Outcome HC1.1. Conservation of existing housing, through restoration and
rehabilitation, as a physical asset that contributes to the value and marketability of
the City.
Metrics:
o Percent of residential units showing improved conditions (in Conservation
Areas and Special Service Districts).
o Percent change in assessed values in Conservation Areas and Special
Service Districts compared to the remainder of the City.
Action HC1.1.1. Identify areas in which technical support and tax or other incentives
available from the City will assist owners to maintain or modernize their properties.
Comments:

Norfolk residents have access to a variety of programs to
help fund the rehabilitation of housing. These include
programs such as:
▪ Equity Secure – Assistance to low- to moderate-income
homeowners for repair/replacement of systems,

7-4 | E N SU R I N G H OU S I N G C HO I CE S F OR A L L

▪
▪

accessibility, lead controls directly associated with
rehabilitation activities, and eligible exterior aesthetic
improvements.
Tax Abatement – Abatement of the tax value of
improvements for up to 14 years.
Norfolk Home Rehabilitation – Assistance to qualified
residents of special service districts to repair heating,
plumbing, etc., to provide handicap accessibility
alterations or to perform exterior aesthetic
improvements.

Action HC1.1.2. Continue to make residential pattern books available to property
owners seeking to renovate or rehabilitate their homes.

Action HC1.1.3. Improve the effectiveness of code enforcement in preventing
deteriorated, unsafe, and unhealthy housing conditions, especially in areas with
persistent enforcement problems, by educating residents and landlords on code
requirements.
Action HC1.1.4. Encourage the return of abandoned housing to safe and useful
occupancy through the Derelict Structures Program, with demolition utilized as a last
resort.
Comments:

The Derelict Structures Program promotes revitalization of
structures that have been vacant and boarded up with no
utility service for at least six months.

Action HC1.1.5. Monitor code enforcement activity to identify potential areas in
need of housing rehabilitation.

E NSU R I N G H O U S I NG C H OI CE S F OR A L L | 7-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action HC1.1.6. Regularly assess housing conditions in Conservation Areas and
Special Service Districts to determine where rehabilitation efforts have been
successful.
Outcome HC1.2. Increased usage of sustainable technology, design, and materials.
Metrics:
o Percent of building permits issued for projects employing “Green” building
techniques.
Action HC1.2.1. Promote the use of “Green” building technologies, including
weatherization, to provide energy conservation benefits (see the Promoting
Environmental Sustainability chapter).
Comments:

“Green” building and remodeling assistance is available
from several sources. These include programs such as:
▪ Southeastern Tidewater Opportunity Project (STOP)
Weatherization Program – Assistance to low-income
residents with insulating and air sealing homes.
▪ Energy efficiency assessment and remodeling guides.
▪ Utilization of “Green” building standards for City- and
NRHA-funded initiatives.

Action HC1.2.2. Continue to offer incentives to encourage energy efficient design
and building, while evaluating the feasibility of additional incentives for both new
construction and renovation projects.
Comments:

Norfolk currently offers expedited permitting for
construction under the Green Home Choice Program. Other
jurisdictions have adopted other incentives such as energy
efficient real estate tax credits.

Outcome HC1.3. Reduced threats of property loss due to flooding.
Metrics:
o Percent of properties in flood zone that do not receive a variance to waive
requirements related to flood protection.
o Percent of homes subject to repetitive loss due to flooding that are raised
or acquired.

7-6 | E N SU R I N G H OU S I N G C HO I CE S F OR A L L

Action HC1.3.1. Improve the City’s rating in the National Flood Insurance Program’s
Community Rating System (CRS) (see Promoting Environmental Sustainability
chapter).
Comments:

Norfolk’s participation in the CRS allows residents to receive
a reduced rate on flood insurance.

Action HC1.3.2. Ensure that all new development in designated flood-prone areas
complies with the City’s flood protection regulations (see Promoting Environmental
Sustainability chapter).
Action HC1.3.3. Ensure that residents and property owners in flood prone areas are
notified of the threat to their properties (see Promoting Environmental
Sustainability chapter).
Action HC1.3.4. Continue to pursue funding to raise or acquire homes that have
experienced repetitive loss due to flooding.

Housing Choices Goal 2. Provide a range of housing choices that are
accessible both in terms of geography and affordability.
Outcome HC2.1. An increased rate of home ownership.
Metrics:
o Percent of occupied residential units that are owner-occupied.
Action HC2.1.1. Ensure that the real estate community is informed about the
diversity of housing types, and the other attributes of housing, available in Norfolk.

Action HC2.1.2. Continue to support NRHA in the creation of new home ownership
opportunities in Conservation and Redevelopment Areas.

E NSU R I N G H O U S I NG C H OI CE S F OR A L L | 7-7

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action HC2.1.3. Seek opportunities to acquire vacant properties that are potential
candidates for foreclosure, through use of federal programs such as the
Neighborhood Stabilization Program, so that these properties can be renovated for
sale to potential home buyers.
Action HC2.1.5. Utilize GEM parcels to encourage the development of owneroccupied affordable housing.
Comments:

The GEM program was established by the City to acquire
tax delinquent properties and return them to productive
use. GEM properties can be used to provide open space,
to expand the yards of adjacent properties, or as
development
opportunities
for
new
residential
construction.

Action HC2.1.6. Continue to work with local lenders, non-profit organizations, and
housing providers to provide education programs for financial counseling and
assistance in buying a home.
Action HC2.1.7. Continue to provide first-time homebuyers purchase assistance and
counseling services.
Comments:

Norfolk residents currently have access to programs that
provide direct financial assistance to first-time
homebuyers. These include programs such as:
▪ HOME – Financial assistance to first time low- to
moderate-income home buyers to purchase homes in
designated conservation and redevelopment areas.
▪ SPARC – Below market rate loans to first time home
buyers.
▪ HomeNet – Technical assistance to prospective home
buyers, including credit counseling, pre- and postpurchase home buyer counseling and first-time home
buyer education classes.
▪ Norfolk Now – Funds to assist with down payments
and closing costs.

Action HC2.1.8. Develop and implement programs to enable firefighters, teachers,
police officers, nurses, city workers, and other applicable public service professionals
to purchase homes.
Comments:

The Old Dominion University Community Development
Corporation developed 51 housing units, 25% of which are
workforce units, along the south side of 43rd Street,

7-8 | E N SU R I N G H OU S I N G C HO I CE S F OR A L L

providing new homeownership opportunities for public
service professionals.
Action HC2.1.9. Continue the tax relief program to assist low-income homeowners
faced with rising property taxes.
Action HC2.1.10. Work to prevent foreclosures in coordination with other
governmental and non-profit organizations that assist at-risk homeowners with
financial and foreclosure counseling.
Comments:

The Norfolk Foreclosure Intervention Network has been
established to provide at-risk homeowners with
information on how to communicate with their lender,
housing rights, budgeting, financial planning, and
counseling to help them retain their homes.

Outcome HC2.2. A variety of housing types that are affordable and responsive to
the needs of owners and renters.
Metrics:
o Percent of households paying less than 30 percent of their income on
shelter, including utilities.
Action HC2.2.1. Ensure that the Zoning Ordinance permits a variety of residential
densities and housing types.

Action HC2.2.2. Consider the use of density bonuses as a means of promoting the
production of affordable housing to meet current and future demand.
Comments:

A density bonus is an incentive-based tool that permits
developers to increase the maximum allowable
development on a property in exchange for helping the
community achieve public policy goals.

E NSU R I N G H O U S I NG C H OI CE S F OR A L L | 7-9

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action HC2.2.3. Develop programs to discourage concentrations of poverty, while
ensuring affordable housing is located in proximity to employment centers, service
centers, and public transit.
Action HC2.2.4. Continue to support the efforts of NRHA to provide and improve the
quality of housing for low- and very low-income residents.

Action HC2.2.5. Utilize State and federal programs offering funding for mixedincome and mixed-use projects, to leverage private sector development interest and
partnerships for assistance in redevelopment actions.
Action HC2.2.6. Support the creation of a stable source of housing development
funds at the federal, State, and local levels.
Action HC2.2.7. Encourage compatible infill housing on vacant or underutilized
parcels to minimize the impact of land costs on housing.
Action HC2.2.8. Regularly assess the effects of City policies and regulations on
housing development costs and overall affordability while considering the impact of
housing affordability on other objectives.
Action HC2.2.9. Provide leadership to create a balanced regional supply of
affordable housing.
Action HC2.2.10. Encourage a coordinated approach to the development of
affordable housing, involving all affected agencies.
Action HC2.2.11. Ensure information on the rights of tenants under the Virginia
Residential Landlord and Tenant Act is available to renters.
Outcome HC2.3. Elimination of discriminatory housing practices.
Metrics:
o Number of complaints of discriminatory housing practices received.
7-10 | E N SU R I N G H OU SI N G C H OI CE S FO R A LL

Action HC2.3.1. Continue to work with federal, State, and local agencies to ensure
that fair housing legislation is enforced.
Action HC2.3.2. Ensure that landlords, property managers, real estate agents,
lenders, and other housing-related professionals are aware of their responsibilities
with regards to fair housing regulations.

Housing Choices Goal 3. Ensure that the housing needs of the special
needs populations are met.
Outcome HC3.1. An adequate supply of housing to meet the needs of special needs
populations.
Metrics:
o Change in percent of special needs population with housing problems.
Action HC3.1.1. Work with agencies throughout the region to develop and
implement policies and programs addressing the needs of special needs populations.
Action HC3.1.2. Support home modifications and rental and utility assistance to aid
special needs populations with remaining in their homes.
Action HC3.1.3. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to permit residents to remain in their
communities throughout the different stages of life, by allowing a range of
innovative and non-traditional housing types.
Action HC3.1.4. Encourage the development of housing for special needs
populations near neighborhood centers, shopping centers, public transportation,
schools, parks, and open space.
Action HC3.1.5. Continue to support NRHA in its efforts to expand the supply of
assisted housing units for the elderly to meet increasing demand for such units.
Action HC3.1.6. Support the development of a continuum of housing, ranging from
emergency shelters to transitional housing to permanent housing, in order to assist
the homeless in regaining stable, permanent housing.
Action HC3.1.7.
Continue to support and develop strategies to prevent
homelessness among families with children and unaccompanied youth.

E NSU R I N G H O U S I NG C H OI CE S F OR A L L | 7-11
Revised June 2014

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action HC3.1.8. Continue to work in partnership with various levels of government
and public agencies to address homelessness on a regional basis.

7-12 | E N SU R I N G H OU SI N G C H OI CE S FO R A LL

CHAPTER 8: SUPPORTING LIFELONG LEARNING

“Opportunities for learning that extend through all
stages of life.”

A

vibrant city provides its residents, from birth through retirement and beyond,
with opportunities to continue to develop their skills and interests. Lifelong
learning opportunities are offered by Norfolk’s schools, both public and private,
community colleges, universities and trade schools, workforce and vocational training
centers, libraries, recreation centers, and other providers.

NORFOLK PUBLIC SCHOOLS
Norfolk Public Schools (NPS) is overseen by the Norfolk School Board, an independent
board funded by the City but ultimately responsible for its own budget. NPS operates
more than 50 facilities (see Map LL-1), with almost 5.2 million square feet of educational
space.

S U P P OR T I NG L I FE L ON G L E A R NI NG | 8-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

More than 34,000 students are enrolled in grades pre-kindergarten through 12 at NPS
facilities, with additional students enrolled in private schools. Public school enrollment
has been declining since 1998 and it is projected to continue to decline, though that
decline is not anticipated to impact all grade levels equally. According to a 2007
facilities study, utilization of NPS facilities – calculated by comparing actual and
projected enrollments to functional building capacity – is expected to rise over the next
decade at elementary schools while declining at the middle and high school level. Table
LL-1 illustrates the current and projected utilization rates for each category of public
school as well as the total utilization rate for NPS. It also lists the utilization rate of the
school with the lowest and highest rates in each category.
TABLE LL-1
NORFOLK PUBLIC SCHOOLS – CURRENT AND PROJECTED UTILIZATION
Source: Virginia Department of Education, Norfolk Public Schools

Utilization
Percentage
Per Facility*
Lowest
Utilization
Highest
Utilization
Average
Utilization

2008 2016
-2009 -2017

Elementary
School
Utilization**
2008 2016
-2009 -2017

Middle
High School
Total
School
Utilization
Utilization
Utilization
2008 2016 2008 2016 2008 2016
-2009 -2017 -2009 -2017 -2009 -2017

27%

71%

67%

79%

50%

51%

107%

81%

27%

51%

42%

80%

131%

145%

107%

108%

126%

99%

131%

145%

35%

76%

94%

105%

89%

85%

117%

93%

96%

97%

Preschool
Utilization

* - Assumes a 90% utilization factor at the elementary school level and a 75% utilization factor at the
middle school and high school level, calculated by multiplying building code capacity by the
appropriate utilization factor to arrive at a more realistic functional capacity
** - Includes pre-kindergarten students at all facilities and grade 6-8 students at Ghent School

8-2 | S U P P OR T I N G L I F E LO N G L E A R NI N G

MAP LL-1. PUBLIC SCHOOLS

S U P P OR T I NG L I FE L ON G L E A R NI NG | 8-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Many NPS facilities are in need of renovation or replacement as a result of their age, as
well as evolving educational models; the oldest school in the system dates to 1910.
Flexibility and energy efficiency have become key considerations for new and updated
facilities. To address these issues, NPS has examined the expansion of models such as
the K-8 school model, where students from kindergarten through 8th grade are taught in
the same facility, a model currently applied at Ghent School.

In addition to the public education system, Norfolk residents also have access to many
private K-12 schools located within the City. There are also several public and private
institutions of higher learning located within the City, including Old Dominion University,
Norfolk State University, the Norfolk Campus of Tidewater Community College, and
Eastern Virginia Medical School. The private Virginia Wesleyan College is partially
located in Norfolk. Several other institutions of higher learning are also located in the
City.

PRIVATE SCHOOLS AND HOME-SCHOOLING
Norfolk is served by numerous private schools enrolling students of all ages. Many of
these schools are operated by faith-based organizations, while others are secular in
nature. Additional private schools, located in surrounding cities, also educate children
living in Norfolk. Norfolk is also home to many children who are home schooled.
Consistent with national trends, the number of home schooled students residing in
Norfolk has increased over the last decade, with approximately 500 Norfolk home
schooled students.

HIGHER EDUCATION
Norfolk is home to two state universities, Old Dominion University and Norfolk State
University, the Eastern Virginia Medical School, the private Virginia Wesleyan College,
and the Norfolk Campus of Tidewater Community College (see Map LL-2). Situated on a
185-acre main campus located on the City’s west end, Old Dominion has grown to
become the largest University in the region, with an enrollment of 24,446. Norfolk

8-4 | S U P P OR T I N G L I F E LO N G L E A R NI N G

State, founded as the Norfolk unit of Virginia Union University in 1935, has grown to be
one of the largest predominantly black institutions in the nation. Located on a 134-acre
campus located just east of Downtown Norfolk, NSU has a fall 2012 enrollment of 7,100.
Eastern Virginia Medical School, a part of the larger Eastern Virginia Medical Center
complex, is one of four medical schools in Virginia. The product of a grassroots effort to
create a medical school in Hampton Roads, EVMS was established in 1973 and has a
current enrollment of approximately 900 students. Tidewater Community College, the
largest provider of higher education in Hampton Roads, has four campuses in the
region, including one located in Downtown Norfolk. The Norfolk Campus, opened in
1997, enrolls a significant portion of TCC’s 46,000 students.
Private colleges in the City include Virginia Wesleyan College, located on the border
between Norfolk and Virginia Beach, as well as several other smaller institutions.
Chartered in 1961 with support of the United Methodist Church, Virginia Wesleyan
enrolls 1,287 students. Other private colleges include campuses of Centura College,
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University, Fortis College, ITT Technical Institute, Saint Leo
University, and Troy University.

CONTINUING EDUCATION
In addition to the opportunities presented by the full range of educational institutions,
lifelong learning opportunities are available throughout the community. Enrichment,
education and jobs skills programs and classes are provided at libraries and recreation
centers, the workforce development center, and by numerous community partners. In
addition, programming aimed at increasing self-sufficiency is provided by the
Department of Human Services and NRHA, as well as other community partners.

KEY ISSUES
Based upon existing conditions and trends, the following are the key issues for Norfolk
related to lifelong learning:
1. Maintaining safe and effective school facilities.
2. Investing in lifelong learning to promote economic vitality.
3. Improving economic competitiveness through the enhancement of regional
cooperation, especially related to education and transportation.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Enhancing Economic Vitality
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Enjoying Daily Life
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

S U P P OR T I NG L I FE L ON G L E A R NI NG | 8-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP LL-2. COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES

8-6 | S U P P OR T I N G L I F E LO N G L E A R NI N G

Lifelong Learning Goal 1. Provide learning opportunities that are
responsive to the changing needs of Norfolk’s population.
Outcome LL1.1. Efficient public schools, appropriately sized to meet the needs of
the school-aged population.
Metrics:
o Change in the percent of public schools with a utilization rate between
80% and 120%.
Action LL1.1.1. Continue to regularly evaluate the utilization of existing public
school facilities to determine the need for adjustments to attendance zones or for
the construction, renovation, or closure of facilities.

Action LL1.1.2. Locate new school facilities on sites that:
• Are accessible to the population being served.
• Can increase efficiency by accommodating multiple public uses.
• Can serve as community and neighborhood focal points.
• Can remain safe, accessible, and usable during storms and other
emergency events and into the future, using Vision 2100 and AICUZ as
guides.
Comments:

These same factors apply to all city facilities (see Delivering
Quality Community Services chapter).

Action LL1.1.3. Respond to socioeconomic needs and shifts in public school
enrollment through innovative techniques, such as the use of the K-8 school model.

S U P P OR T I NG L I FE L ON G L E A R NI NG | 8-7
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action LL1.1.4. Ensure that outdoor recreational facilities that share sites with
public schools are open and accessible to residents outside school hours (see
Enjoying Daily Life chapter).
Outcome LL1.2. Children who are prepared for success in school.
Metrics:
o Change in reading level of third grade students.
o Percent of children ready for kindergarten.
Action LL1.2.1. Identify and monitor programs to improve the quality of learning
within daycare centers.
Action LL1.2.2. Continue to implement programs designed to improve readiness for
school such as Implement programs designed to improve readiness for school such
as Norfolk Ready By 5 and After the Bell.
Action LL1.2.3. Increase access to libraries, recreation centers, and other community
facilities to better utilize programs such as early childhood literacy and after school
care (see Enjoying Daily Life chapter).
Action LL1.2.4. Increase the number and accessibility of high quality child care
homes and centers by removing regulatory barriers.
Action LL1.2.5. Connect families with early intervention and support services by
implementing a universal newborn screening and referral system.
Action LL1.2.6. Develop a focused outreach effort in the community and education
settings to increase awareness of the importance of early childhood development.
Outcome LL1.3. A well-trained, qualified workforce.
Metrics:
o Reduction in the number of people who live in poverty.
o Change in high school graduation rate.
Action LL1.3.1. Work with educational partners, both within and outside of Norfolk,
including universities, colleges, and trade schools, to tailor their educational
programs to the changing opportunities presented by Norfolk’s economy (see
Enhancing Economic Vitality and Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation
chapters).

8-8 | S U P P OR T I N G L I F E LO N G L E A R NI N G
Revised August 2017

Action LL1.3.2. Support Norfolk Public Schools in efforts to provide both collegetrack and trade education that is responsive to economic opportunities (see
Enhancing Economic Vitality chapter).
Action LL1.3.3. Identify and provide opportunities for career training and
development of Norfolk residents that can lead to jobs in Norfolk industries (see
Enhancing Economic Vitality chapter).
Action LL1.3.4. Support the availability of adult basic education and GED programs.
Action LL1.3.5. Increase access to libraries, recreation centers, and other community
facilities to better utilize programs aimed at increasing literacy and job readiness,
and assisting with job searches (see Enjoying Daily Life chapter).
Action LL1.3.6. Identify and address the most significant barriers to employment for
the underemployed, unemployed and those living in poverty.
Outcome LL1.4. Partnerships and community resources that provide opportunities
for training and continuing education.
Metrics:
o Percent change in participations in lifelong learning opportunities.
Action LL1.4.1. Partner with the universities, colleges, medical institutions,
businesses, corporate entities, and the military to provide opportunities for training
and continuing education (see Enhancing Economic Vitality chapter).
Action LL1.4.2. Develop and implement a pilot program using schools as
neighborhood centers to offer lifelong learning opportunities.
Action LL1.4.3. Develop a database of lifelong learning resources, building on any
existing databases, to better connect residents with available opportunities.
Action LL1.4.4. Continue to work with the military, colleges and universities to
develop skills and enhance job opportunities for veterans.

S U P P OR T I NG L I FE L ON G L E A R NI NG | 8-9
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

8-10 | S U P P OR T I N G L I FE L O N G L E A R N I NG

CHAPTER 9: DELIVERING QUALITY COMMUNITY SERVICES

“A well managed government that provides
efficient and accountable public services to its citizens.”

N

orfolk provides residents with an array of community services, as do other
public, private, and non-profit agencies. These services are delivered to the
public through a series of facilities spread throughout the City. Some facilities,
such as elementary schools, serve a neighborhood or limited area, while other facilities,
such as City Hall, serve the entire community.
Ensuring accessibility to the population being served is critical. One way Norfolk
ensures accessibility to its facilities is providing multiple services to a neighborhood
under one roof. An example of this is the neighborhood center in Park Place, which
houses a public library, a public health clinic, and a variety of recreation facilities on a
single property shared with an elementary school (note that educational facilities are
addressed in the Supporting Lifelong Learning chapter).

PUBLIC SAFETY
Public safety in Norfolk is primarily the responsibility of three agencies, the Norfolk
Police Department, the Norfolk Fire-Rescue Department, and the Norfolk Office of
Emergency Preparedness and Response. Their services are augmented by other City,

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
State, and federal agencies.
Together, these
organizations ensure the safety and security of
Norfolk residents and visitors.
With a force of 757 sworn officers, the Norfolk Police
Department has primary responsibility for law
enforcement within the City. In addition to an
administration building located Downtown, the
Norfolk Police Department operates from three
police patrol divisions and a K-9 facility (see Map CS1). Co-located within the patrol divisions are
investigative services, homeland security, and
training resources.
Various other agencies provide law enforcement
services in the City as well. The Virginia State Police
patrols the Interstate Highways.
The Norfolk
Sheriff’s Office is responsible for maintaining safety and security in the City Jail and the
City’s courthouses, as well as administering community corrections programs and
providing civil process. Smaller agencies, such as the Norfolk State University Police, the
Old Dominion University Police, and the Norfolk Airport Authority Police, are
responsible for safety and security at institutions located within Norfolk and the areas
immediately surrounding those institutions.
The number of reported crimes in Norfolk has remained relatively stable over the past
seven years, fluctuating by small percentages from year to year. The majority of all
crime in Norfolk is property crime, representing approximately 90% of all crimes
reported in 2010. Table CS-1 illustrates crime rates between 2004 and 2010.
TABLE CS-1
CRIME IN THE CITY OF NORFOLK – 2004-2010
Source: 2004-2010 FBI Uniform Crime Reports;
Population figures from Weldon Cooper Center for Public Service

Violent Crimes per 1,000 Residents
Property Crimes per 1,000 Residents
All Crimes per 1,000 Residents

2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
5.62 7.69 7.70 7.95 8.03 6.32 6.17
52.58 54.56 48.81 47.61 50.19 53.04 56.24
58.20 62.25 56.51 55.56 58.22 59.36 62.41

9-2 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S

MAP CS-1. PUBLIC SAFETY FACILITIES

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

The Norfolk Department of Fire-Rescue is responsible for protecting life and property in
the City by preventing and suppressing fires, mitigating hazards, caring for the sick and
injured in emergency situations, and providing fire safety education. Norfolk FireRescue operates from 14 stations scattered throughout the City (see Map CS-1). FireRescue also operates a fire training facility at Station 9. The stations vary in both age
and building design. The nine older facilities – particularly Station 11 on Verdun Avenue
and Station 12 on West Little Creek Road that date to the 1920s – present a variety of
operational challenges, due to their age and location. Five newer facilities built in the
1980s and 1990s support modern fire and rescue operations.

The Office of Emergency Preparedness and Response provides three major services:
Emergency Communications/911, Emergency Management, and Building Physical
Security. The Norfolk Division of Emergency Management (NDEM) provides services to
the city and community to prepare an effective response to disasters. NDEM monitors
federal and state legislation and potential grants that directly impact the provision of
emergency services to the community.

PUBLIC UTILITIES
Public utility services, such as the provision of drinking water, the collection and
conveyance of wastewater, the management of stormwater runoff, and the collection
and recycling of solid waste, are provided by the Departments of Utilities and Public
Works.
The Department of Utilities provides water and sewer service to approximately 65,000
sites. Drinking water is retrieved from several sources around the region and treated at
one of two city facilities. Wastewater is delivered to Hampton Roads Sanitation District
(HRSD) facilities for treatment. These services are not limited to Norfolk, however.
Norfolk presently has agreements with the City of Virginia Beach to treat raw water,
with the City of Chesapeake to provide both raw and treated drinking water, with the
Western Tidewater Water Authority to provide raw water, with the U.S. Navy to provide
treated drinking water, and with the City of Portsmouth to provide drought water. In
all, more than 850,000 regional residents get their drinking water from Norfolk’s
sources.

9-4 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S

Solid waste collection, including the operation of recycling and street sweeping
programs, is the responsibility of the Department of Public Works, which collects more
than 100,000 tons of solid waste annually. The City recycles a significant portion of the
solid waste it collects, amounting to approximately 19% of the solid waste collected in
2011. The City delivers the solid waste it collects to transfer stations and landfills,
operated by the Southeastern Public Service Authority, throughout the region.

CEMETERIES
The City of Norfolk has operated cemeteries since 1825, when the first public cemetery,
Cedar Grove, was established. Today, the City owns and operates eight cemeteries (see
Map CS-2): Cedar Grove, Elmwood, West Point, Magnolia, Riverside, Hebrew, Calvary,
and Forest Lawn. One of these cemeteries, West Point, is listed on the National Register
of Historic Places. The Department of Recreation, Parks, and Open Space is responsible
for maintaining the City’s public cemeteries. A private membership organization –
Friends of Norfolk’s Historic Cemeteries – promotes and helps the City maintain these
facilities.

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP CS-2. CITY-OWNED CEMETERIES

9-6 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, following are the key issues involving
community services in Norfolk:
1. Maintaining safe and effective facilities.
2. Increasing the efficiency of service delivery.
3. Ensuring continued high quality service provision.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability
o Supporting Lifelong Learning
o Enjoying Daily Life
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

Community Services Goal 1. Ensure the availability of community
facilities and services to meet the needs of the public, both daily and
during times of shock or stress.
Outcome CS1.1. Resilient, safe, adaptable, and well maintained city facilities.
Metrics:
o Change in the number of days city facilities are offline due to lack of
maintenance.
Action CS1.1.1. Locate new city facilities on sites that are accessible to the
population being served and on sites that can increase efficiency by accommodating
multiple public uses, while also serving as community and neighborhood focal points
(see Supporting Lifelong Learning chapter).
Comments:

There are many instances in the City where recreation
centers or libraries are co-located with school buildings,
allowing those facilities to share parking and recreation
fields. Such co-locations can improve efficiency, reduce
operating costs, and provide environmental benefits.

Action CS1.1.2. When evaluating potential sites for the location or relocation of a
city facility, consider vulnerability to flood damage or isolation due to flooding or
other resilience factors using Vision 2100 as a guide and noise and accident potential
from aircraft operations using AICUZ.

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-7
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action CS1.1.3. Design new city facilities to adapt to changing technologies and to
include flexible meeting spaces that can host multiple users.
Action CS1.1.4. Incorporate resilience into design and location processes for public
buildings and spaces.
Action CS1.1.5. Continue to maintain existing city facilities, extending their useful
life through repairs and renovations, including appropriate upgrades.
Action CS1.1.6. Develop a long term strategy for the replacement of aging city
facilities, including as part of that strategy consideration of the feasibility of
consolidation and the co-location of multiple facilities on one site.
Action CS1.1.7. Ensure that the City’s Emergency Operations Plan addresses public
and private infrastructure and service needs during times of emergency, but also
serves as a daily planning document to address mitigation, preparation, response
and recovery from threats.
Outcome CS1.2. Improved access to services through enhanced technology.
Metrics:
o Percent of complete, non-administrative land use applications posted
online within 72 hours of receipt.
o Percent of land use applications received online.
o Percent of building permits processed online.
Action CS1.2.1. Explore opportunities for expediting development processes, such
as encouraging online submittal of applications.
Comments:

A simplified fee schedule approach, reflecting the labor it
takes to review applications, would be necessary to permit
applications to be submitted online.

9-8 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S
Revised August 2017

Community Services Goal 2. Provide a safe environment for residents,
workers, and visitors.
Outcome CS2.1. Police protection and service that are responsive to the needs of
the City’s residents, visitors, and businesses.
Metrics:
o Percent change in the average response time to Priority 1 calls.
o Percent change in the number of property and violent crimes reported.
Action CS2.1.1. Maintain average emergency response times of 6½ minutes or less
for Priority 1 calls.
Action CS2.1.2. Continue to explore alternatives that may reduce response times
throughout the City, such as the relocation of existing facilities and the addition of
new facilities.
Outcome CS2.2.
environment.

Fire and rescue services that protect life, property, and the

Metrics:
o Percent change in the average
response time to fire and emergency
medical calls.
Action CS2.2.1. Maintain average emergency
response times of no more than 4 minutes for
the deployment of the first fire unit to the scene
of a fire or medical emergency, and no more than
8 minutes for the deployment of the balance of a
first alarm assignment or an ambulance to the
scene of a medical emergency.
Action CS2.2.2. Develop a long term strategy for
improving and expanding fire training spaces
within the City, and work to expand the number
of facilities available for shared regional training.
Comments:

The Norfolk Fire Department presently has limited training
spaces. The department currently utilizes facilities in
neighboring jurisdictions to conduct non-classroom training.

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-9
Revised June 2014

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action CS2.2.3. Maintain an International Insurance Services Office (ISO) rating for
fire safety of 2 or better.
Action CS2.2.4. Continue to provide fire and life safety education programs in the
public schools and elsewhere in the community.
Outcome CS2.3. Effective response to emergency situations.
Metrics:
o Percent of declared emergencies for which required responses to FEMA
are submitted in a timely manner.
Action CS2.3.1. Maintain and update the Emergency Operations Plan, and continue
to coordinate emergency planning efforts with other local governments in the
region, non-profit organizations, and State and federal agencies.
Action CS2.3.2. Annually undertake emergency operations drills, simulating the
City’s response to various emergency situations.
Action CS2.3.3. Evaluate the City’s response following any declared emergency.
Action CS2.3.4. Improve the City’s ability to provide residents with timely
information on changing conditions during emergency situations.
Action CS2.3.5. Provide education and training to increase citizens’ ability to take
mitigative actions prior to disaster events.
Action CS2.3.6. Improve post-event damage assessment procedures so that
damages, event frequencies, and other data are more readily available for mitigation
planning.
Outcome CS2.4. Animal care facilities that provide safe haven for animals in need of
care.
Metrics:
o Percent change in the total number of volunteer hours at Norfolk Animal
Care Facilities.
o Percent change in the number of adoptable animals euthanized.
Action CS2.4.1. Continue to assess the behavioral characteristics of surrendered and
found animals to identify all suitable candidates for adoption.

9-10 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U N I T Y S E R V I CE S
Revised August 2017

Action CS2.4.2. Improve the ability of the Norfolk Animal Care Center to identify
animal ownership so that animals can be returned to their homes whenever
possible.
Action CS2.4.3. Encourage special events to promote the adoption of animals
housed at the Norfolk Animal Care Center.
Action CS2.4.4. Continue to encourage volunteerism and donations to help support
the operations of the Norfolk Animal Care Center.

Community Services Goal 3. Provide quality public utility services that
meet the current and future needs of residents and businesses.
Outcome CS3.1. Clean, safe drinking water provided at the best possible value to all
customers of the Norfolk water system.
Metrics:
o Gallons of water produced per day.
o Percent of water produced meeting Safe Drinking Water Act standards.
Action CS3.1.1. Maintain the ability to treat 100 million gallons of drinking water per
day.
Action CS3.1.2. Ensure compliance with the requirements of the Safe Drinking
Water Act by continuing to perform regular testing and maintenance of the City’s
drinking water system.

Action CS3.1.3. Continue the implementation of the long term infrastructure
improvement plan to ensure regular maintenance and improvements to the water
treatment and delivery system.
Comments:

During FY2010, 11 miles of water mains were replaced while
49 new fire hydrants were installed under this program.

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-11
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action CS3.1.4. Maintain, and expand where appropriate, regional water production
agreements in order to maximize the return on the City’s infrastructure investments.
Action CS3.1.5. Continue to promote watershed protection programs for people
living within reservoir watershed areas.
Action CS3.1.6. Monitor upstream sources of pollutants that could impact Norfolk’s
water supply and intervene where appropriate.
Outcome CS3.2. A reliable and efficient system for the collection and management
of wastewater from Norfolk homes and businesses.
Metrics:
o Linear feet of wastewater collection system cleared.
Action CS3.2.1. Maintain the ability to collect and transmit for disposal 20 million
gallons of wastewater per day.
Action CS3.2.2. Continue to perform regular testing, cleaning, and maintenance of
the City’s wastewater collection system to ensure compliance with federal and State
environmental regulations.
Action CS3.2.3. Continue the implementation of the long term infrastructure
improvement plan to ensure regular maintenance and improvements to the
wastewater collection and conveyance system.
Comments:

During FY2010, nearly 13 miles of sewer mains were
replaced under this program.

Action CS3.2.4. Continue support of HRSD improvements to the wastewater
collection and treatment system.
Outcome CS3.3. A safe, reliable, and efficient system for the collection and
management, including recycling, of Norfolk’s solid waste.
Metrics:
o Percent change in the number of complaints of missed collection stops
reported.
o Percent of total tonnage of solid waste recycled annually.
o Participation rate in the curbside recycling program.
Action CS3.3.1. Maintain the ability to collect refuse and recycling on the day
scheduled and remove dead animals within one day of a report.

9-12 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U N I T Y S E R V I CE S
Revised August 2017

Action CS3.3.2. Increase participation in the curbside recycling program, to achieve
a target of recycling 25% or more of all solid waste collected, through continued
marketing and educational efforts.
Action CS3.3.3. Continue to support and promote household hazardous waste
recycling opportunities.
Action CS3.3.4. Evaluate potential changes to yard waste disposal practices.
Action CS3.3.5. Continue to require the screening of dumpsters.
Action CS3.3.6.
containers.

Establish screening requirements for smaller garbage disposal

Outcome CS3.4. A stormwater management system that reduces the quantity and
improves the quality of stormwater runoff.
Metrics:
o Change in the water quality of receiving waters.
o Percent of street sweepings that take place on the scheduled day.
o Feet of drainage ditches cleared of debris.
o Number of drain structures cleared of debris.
Action CS3.4.1. Clear debris from at least 120,000 linear feet of drainage ditches and
7,500 drain structures each year.
Action CS3.4.2. Maintain the ability to sweep streets of debris on the regularlyscheduled date.
Action CS3.4.3. Continue regularly inspecting all Best Management Practices (BMP)
structures installed in the City, on both public and private property, to ensure proper
maintenance and performance in accordance with the City’s Virginia Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (VPDES) permit requirements.
Comments:

Norfolk operates a network of pipes and outfalls, called the
municipal separate storm sewer (MS4) system, which
collects rainwater from the streets and discharges it into
local waterways. This system is permitted by the Virginia
Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) through a
VPDES permit, which ensures that the level of pollutants
entering the waterways is reduced to the maximum extent
possible.

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-13

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Action CS3.4.4. Develop and implement a stormwater master plan.
Action CS3.4.5. Continue to implement cost-effective capital improvements that
add resilience by improving stormwater management and controlling flooding, using
Vision 2100 for guidance.
Action CS3.4.6. Continue to provide educational materials to Norfolk property
owners on the importance of keeping the stormwater drainage system clean.
Outcome CS3.5.
networks.

Reliable access to electricity, natural gas, and communication

Metrics:
o Percent of incidents in which procedures for identifying affected public
utilities are in place and implemented.
Action CS3.5.1. Continue to coordinate upgrades and replacement of non-City
provided utilities, including electricity, natural gas and communication networks.
Action CS3.5.2. Work with our utility partners to ensure access to electricity, natural
gas, and communication networks both daily and during times of shock or stress.
Action CS3.5.3. Encourage the provision of independent back-up sources of power to
be used when primary power source is interrupted for an extended period.

9-14 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U N I T Y S E R V I CE S
Revised January 2018

Community Services Goal 4. Maintain the City’s cemeteries as places of
honor and respect.
Outcome CS4.1. Well-maintained cemeteries.
Metrics:
o Percent change in the number of complaints about maintenance of cityowned cemeteries.
Action CS4.1.1. Ensure the continued maintenance and improvement of city-owned
cemeteries.
Comments:

Norfolk also has privately-owned cemeteries, the
maintenance of which is addressed through existing
property maintenance requirements.

Action CS4.1.2. Support the efforts of the Norfolk Society for Cemetery
Conservation to preserve, protect, and promote Norfolk’s historic cemeteries.

D E LI V E R I NG Q U A LI T Y C O M M U NI T Y S E R V I CE S | 9-15
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

9-16 | D E LI V E R I N G Q U A LI T Y C OM M U N I T Y S E R V I CE S
Revised June 2015

CHAPTER 10: ENJOYING DAILY LIFE

“A wide variety of cultural and recreational opportunities that lead to a fun
and healthy lifestyle for a diverse population.”

N

orfolk, as the urban center of the Hampton Roads region, provides an
abundance of opportunities for people to relax and play. The availability of
such opportunities is critical to the success of any vibrant city. The
opportunities found in Norfolk include those provided by universities, museums,
beaches, parks, libraries, and entertainment venues, as well as the uses that emerge
around these locations, such as coffee shops, cafés, art studios, and bookstores.
Together with the programs that occur at these places, they enhance the quality of life
enjoyed by residents and visitors.
The diversity of Norfolk’s population demands a variety of recreational and cultural
facilities and programs. Opportunities for youth are critical in any urban place. As
Norfolk’s population ages, encouraging active living for older citizens will also become
increasingly important.
In recent years, Norfolk has experienced increases in its population of professionals in
creative careers such as science, engineering, education, computer programming,
research, the arts, design, and media. This group, termed the “creative class” in a series

E NJ OY I NG D A I LY L I FE | 10-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
of books by University of Toronto public policy Professor Richard Florida, has worked
independently of City efforts to enhance the experience of living in Norfolk. Their
efforts have included initiating events and festivals, supporting entertainment venues,
and opening new media and creative business ventures. They have also lobbied the City
to remove barriers to the provision of facilities and activities that are attractive to their
group. Groups such as the Greater Norfolk Corporation have launched initiatives such
as “Brain Drain to Brain Gain” to attract and retain young professionals.

PARKS AND RECREATION
Among the opportunities Norfolk residents have for daily enjoyment is the wide array of
recreational opportunities offered by the Department of Recreation, Parks, and Open
Space. Norfolk is home to approximately 160 separately-designated public parks,
totaling approximately 2,500 acres, and 27 community centers (see Map DL-1). This
includes two festival parks – Town Point Park and Ocean View Park – capable of hosting
large events, three golf courses, and six ten-acre-plus community parks. The City hosts a
wide variety of recreation programs at these facilities, ranging from fitness classes to
organized athletic leagues, and from art instruction
to technology education. Linking these amenities,
the City also has initiated development of a system
of bicycle paths that is planned for expansion and
includes both on- and off-road facilities (see
Providing Transportation Options chapter).
Constant additions and upgrades are being made to
the City’s parks and recreation centers.
The
Lamberts Point Community Center opened in 2010
and the City is constructing an aquatic center in
Campostella scheduled to open in 2013.
The private sector also provides recreational facilities
available to the public, some of which are in
partnership with the City. A recreation center,
funded through the Joan B. Kroc Foundation as a
partnership between the City, the Norfolk
Redevelopment and Housing Authority, and the
Salvation Army, is planned for the Broad Creek area.
A YMCA, to be developed in partnership with the
City, is planned for the Park Place area.
Norfolk Public Schools operates multiple school sites that include some recreational
amenities that are made available for public use. The City also offers opportunities for
outdoor passive recreation. These include the Norfolk Botanical Garden, a site of over
155 acres showcasing numerous plant species, and the Virginia Zoo, housing 115 species
of animals on 53 acres; both facilities charge admission for entry. The City’s eight
10-2 | E N J OY I N G D A I L Y L I FE

publicly-owned cemeteries, containing several miles of paved pathways suitable for
walking, offer additional opportunities for passive recreation.

LIBRARIES AND CULTURAL FACILITIES
Libraries and cultural facilities are another area in which Norfolk – and regional –
residents are provided with opportunities for daily enjoyment. Through twelve libraries
(see Map DL-2) totaling more than 139,000 square feet and a bookmobile, Norfolk
Public Library (NPL) provides free public access to more than 616,000 books and
multimedia items, computers, meeting rooms, and a
wide variety of programs and events. Utilization of
library facilities has increased steadily in recent
years, with more than 1.2 million visits made to a
library facility in 2010. NPL is in the process of
upgrading its facilities to respond to this increased
utilization, constructing a new library in Ocean View
that opened in 2008, and a new main library
Downtown that is scheduled to open in 2014. NPL
has also focused on upgrading technology and
enhancing the public spaces in its facilities to better
integrate them with the neighborhoods that
surround them.
Norfolk is also home to a diverse collection of
museums, performance venues, and cultural
facilities (see Map DL-2), including the Attucks
Theater, Chrysler Hall, the Chrysler Museum of Art,
Harbor Park, Harrison Opera House, the MacArthur
Memorial, Nauticus, and the Norfolk Scope Arena. In
addition to these facilities, there are numerous other
facilities operated by private organizations,
universities, and other institutions. Norfolk also
maintains a partnership with Norfolk FestEvents, a not-for-profit organization charged
with hosting and promoting festivals, special events, concerts, and other events at
various locations Downtown and in Ocean View, including Town Point Park and Ocean
View Beach Park, as well as venues like Waterside, MacArthur Center, and the Half
Moone Cruise and Celebration Center.

E NJ OY I NG D A I LY L I FE | 10-3

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP DL-1. PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATION CENTERS

10-4 | E N J OY I N G D A I L Y L I FE

MAP DL-2. LIBRARIES AND CULTURAL FACILITIES

E NJ OY I NG D A I LY L I FE | 10-5

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

KEY ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and trends, following are the key issues in the enjoyment
of daily life in Norfolk:
1. Providing Norfolk residents with a variety of parks and recreational
opportunities.
2. Providing Norfolk and regional residents with a variety of cultural opportunities.
3. Fostering the development of a more vibrant, dynamic city.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability
o Supporting Lifelong Learning
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Fostering Responsible Regional Cooperation

Daily Life Goal 1. Provide Norfolk residents with a rich variety of parks
and recreational opportunities.
Outcome DL1.1. A variety of recreational programs and facilities at convenient
locations.
Metrics:
o Percent of households located within the distances established in Action
1.1.1 from a recreational facility.
o Acres of recreational land per 1,000 residents.
Action DL1.1.1. Locate parks and recreation facilities throughout the City in
proximity to residential areas, applying the standards below:
o
o
o
o

Neighborhood parks: ½ mile
Gymnasiums: 1 mile
Bicycle paths: 2 miles
Water access: 2 miles

10-6 | E N J OY I N G D A I L Y L I FE

o
o
o
o

Recreation centers: 2 miles
Baseball fields: 2 miles
Soccer/football fields: 2 miles
Indoor swimming pools: 4 miles

Action DL1.1.2. Provide recreational facilities to maintain a standard of 15 acres of
recreational land per 1,000 residents.
Comments:

The 2010 Recreation Parks and Open Space Master Plan
identifies 13 locations for new neighborhood parks and
recommends enhancements to several dozen parks and
playing fields.

Action DL1.1.3. Seek partnership opportunities with private sector entities,
including civic leagues, schools, religious institutions, and other organizations to
assist in maintaining and operating parks and recreation centers.
Action DL1.1.4. Ensure that outdoor recreational facilities that share sites with
schools are open and accessible to residents outside school hours (see Supporting
Lifelong Learning chapter).

Action DL1.1.5. Design parks and recreational facilities to maximize flexibility, so
that they can be easily adapted to changes in demographics.
Action DL1.1.6. Enhance public access to parks and recreational facilities by making
needed infrastructure improvements to access roads, parking areas, sidewalks,
bikeways, boat ramps, and beach access ways.
Action DL1.1.7. Ensure that one public water access point is provided for every ¼
mile of waterfront by maintaining existing access points, particularly those that
provide parking and those along the Southeast Coast Paddling Trail, and adding new
access points, with a priority given to physical access at existing parks, where none
are presently available.
Action DL1.1.8. Provide a variety of programs at parks and recreational facilities
designed to meet the needs of Norfolk’s residents through all stages of life, from
childhood to the retirement years.

E NJ OY I NG D A I LY L I FE | 10-7

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action DL1.1.9. Periodically survey parks and recreation customers to identify
desired changes in facilities and programming.
Action DL1.1.10. Provide learn-to-swim and boater safety programs for children and
adults at community centers, public schools, and other providers of community
services.
Action DL1.1.11. Continue to work with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers to
maintain navigation channels in the City’s waterways through maintenance dredging
and other channel improvement projects, in order to ensure access for recreational
boaters.

Daily Life Goal 2. Provide the residents of Norfolk and the region with a
variety of cultural opportunities.
Outcome DL2.1. Libraries that provide access to information for all residents, and
support lifelong learning, cultural enrichment, and intellectual stimulation.
Metrics:
o Percent of households located within 2½ miles of a library.
Action DL2.1.1. Ensure that public library facilities are located throughout the City
so that no resident lives more than 2½ miles from a library.
Action DL2.1.2. Create comfortable and inviting common spaces within libraries to
invite users to interact with others in the
community.
Action DL2.1.3.
Periodically survey library
customers to identify necessary changes in hours
of operations and services offered, as well as in
the collections of books, multimedia, and other
materials.
Action DL2.1.4. Regularly re-evaluate technology
and computer resources to ensure the service
demands and technology needs of library
customers are met.
Action DL2.1.5. Continue to provide library
programs that celebrate Norfolk’s cultural
diversity and history.

10-8 | E N J OY I N G D A I L Y L I FE

Action DL2.1.6. Continue to enhance programmatic offerings such as early
childhood literacy, after-school care, local history and genealogy, and job search
programs.
Outcome DL2.2. A variety of cultural and entertainment opportunities.
Metrics:
o Percent change in admissions to cultural and entertainment facilities.
Action DL2.2.1. Continue to recognize the importance of the arts as an economic
tool by coordinating with and promoting the activities of arts organizations such as
the Virginia Arts Festival, the Virginia Opera, the Virginia Stage Company, and the
Virginia Symphony Orchestra, as well as arts programs offered by Norfolk State
University, Old Dominion University, and Tidewater Community College.
Action DL2.2.2. Continue to provide Norfolk and regional residents with access to
cultural and entertainment opportunities through support of facilities such as the
Attucks Theater, Chrysler Hall, the Chrysler Museum of Art, Harbor Park, Harrison
Opera House, the MacArthur Memorial, Nauticus, the Norfolk Botanical Garden, the
Norfolk Scope Arena, Ocean View Park, Town Point Park, and the Virginia Zoo, as
well as facilities located at Norfolk State University, Old Dominion University, and
Tidewater Community College.

Action DL2.2.3. Explore opportunities for collaborating across jurisdictional
boundaries in order to reduce competition among regional cultural facilities and
entertainment venues.

E NJ OY I NG D A I LY L I FE | 10-9

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Daily Life Goal 3. Foster the development of a more vibrant, dynamic city.
Outcome DL3.1. A city that retains and attracts the creative class.
Metrics:
o Percent change in employment in the fields of science, engineering,
education, computer programming, research, the arts, design, and media.
Action DL3.1.1. Support the efforts of the “creative class” as they work to enhance
the vibrancy of Norfolk’s culture.
Action DL3.1.2. Utilize new technologies to more effectively promote events and
activities throughout the City.
Action DL3.1.3. Support the provision of art in public spaces throughout the City.
Comments:

The City of Norfolk’s Public Art Commission is charged with
installing public art throughout the City. Private efforts,
such as the Downtown Norfolk Council’s “Art Everywhere”
event, where Granby Street storefronts are transformed into
art installations, are also supported.

Action DL3.1.4. Revise regulations to reduce restrictions on activities that add “life”
to the street in appropriate locations, such as street vending, parades, festivals, road
races, and other events.

10-10 | E N J OY I N G D A I LY L I FE

Action DL3.1.5. Enhance pedestrian activity in appropriate locations to encourage
the development of a desired mix of uses.
Comments:

The City encourages pedestrian activity in a variety of
locations, including Downtown, the Pedestrian Commercial
Overlay zoning districts, and the Transit Supportive Areas.
See the Identifying Land Use Strategies and Providing
Transportation Options chapters for more information.

Action DL3.1.6. Support the creation of one or more “arts districts” in Norfolk by
making needed regulatory changes to facilitate their development.
Comments:

Citizen groups have been pursuing the creation of arts
districts in at least two locations – the 35th Street corridor in
Park Place and the area north of Brambleton Avenue
between St. Paul’s Boulevard and the Chrysler Museum.
Regulatory changes may be required to facilitate the
appropriate mix of uses, including live/work spaces.

Action DL3.1.7. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to encourage bicycle and pedestrian
travel.
Action DL3.1.8. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to require provisions for bicycles in the
design of new facilities.

E NJ OY I NG D A I LY L I FE | 10-11

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

10-12 | E N J OY I N G D A I LY L I FE

CHAPTER 11: PRESERVING OUR HERITAGE

“A long and rich history that is reflected in its architecture
and cultural resources.”

N

orfolk has a long and rich history that is reflected in its architecture and
cultural resources. This legacy creates a sense of place and contributes to the
unique character of the City. Currently, Norfolk has four locally designated
historic districts: East Freemason, Ghent, Hodges House, and West Freemason. There is
one local overlay district, the Downtown Historic Overlay District (see Map H-1). There
are also 15 National Register historic districts (see Map H-2), as well as almost 50
individually listed properties such as the USS Wisconsin. Table H-1 lists all of Norfolk’s
historic districts. Table H-2 details Norfolk’s National Register Historic Districts,
including the year each district was designated and the number of contributing
structures in each.

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-1
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
TABLE H-1
HISTORIC DISTRICTS
Source: City of Norfolk

Area
Berkley North
Ballentine Place
Chesterfield Heights
Colonial Place
Downtown
East Freemason
Ghent
Hodges House
Lafayette Residence Park
Norfolk & Western Railroad
Norfolk Auto Row
North Ghent
Park Place
Riverview
West Freemason
Williamston/Woodland
Winona

National
Register
Historic
District

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
**

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

Local
Historic
District

✓*
✓
✓
✓

***

✓

* - The Downtown Local Historic District is an overlay zoning district
** - The historic structures in the East Freemason Local Historic District are
all individually listed on the National Register
*** - Included in the Ghent Local Historic District

11-2 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised August 2017

TABLE H-2
NATIONAL REGISTER HISTORIC DISTRICTS
Source: City of Norfolk

Historic District
Berkley North
Ballentine Place
Chesterfield Heights
Colonial Place
Downtown
Ghent
Lafayette Residence Park
Norfolk & Western Railroad
Norfolk Auto Row
North Ghent
Park Place
Riverview
West Freemason
Williamston/Woodland
Winona

Year
Designated
2000
2003
2003
2002
1987 (2001)
1980
1998
2015
2014
1999
2006
1999
1972
2014
2001

Contributing
Structures*
255
862
404
1,094
n/a**
n/a**
284
38
52
321
1,532
200
n/a**
38
203

* - At the time of historic district nomination
** - Nomination forms did not include a list of contributing structures

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-3
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP H-1. LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICTS

11-4 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised June 2015

MAP H-2. NATIONAL REGISTER HISTORIC DISTRICTS

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-5
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Though Norfolk boasts a fine collection of historic
buildings and areas, much has been lost over the
centuries due to war and natural causes, as well as
the extensive urban renewal efforts that began
shortly after World War II. During this time Norfolk
received generous funding from the federal
government
and
implemented
sweeping
redevelopment initiatives. This resulted in a loss of
some of the City’s material heritage. Despite these
events and the lasting alteration they made to the
built environment, many historic resources still
remain in Norfolk. Many of these resources are near
the central business district, though there are
significant historic resources distributed throughout
the City. Major arteries exiting Downtown, such as
Monticello Avenue and Granby Street, are still lined
with historic commercial and industrial buildings.
North of the Ghent Historic District, there are more historic residential and commercial
resources. Wartime housing and related buildings, such as Merrimac Park, are also
significant, reflecting the important military influence in Norfolk. Norfolk is also home
to several historic cemeteries (see Map H-3) and monuments that add to the City’s
historic character.
There are several other residential communities that contain historic resources, some of
which may be eligible for National Register designation or placement in a local historic
district. The 1992 General Plan identified several neighborhoods as potential locations
for either National Register or local historic districts. Several neighborhoods have since
been listed. The remaining neighborhoods identified are: North Ghent, West Ghent,
Colonial Place, Riverview, and Lafayette/Winona. In 2009, the Historic and Architectural
Preservation Committee updated this list, adding several neighborhoods that were not
previously identified. These are: Algonquin Park, Ballentine Place, Berkley North,
Campostella, Chesterfield Heights, Haynes Tract, Lamberts Point, Larchmont, Oakdale
Farms, and Park Place.

11-6 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised June 2015

MAP H-3. HISTORIC CEMETERIES

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-7
Revised June 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Together, Norfolk’s historic resources provide not only an interesting environment for
residents and visitors to Norfolk, but demonstrate a visual passage of time and serve as
reminders of our shared heritage.

KEY ISSUES
Based on the existing conditions and trends, the following are the key issues involving
preservation of Norfolk’s heritage and culture:
1. Improving resident and visitor awareness of Norfolk’s heritage through a variety
of mediums.
2. Increasing the number of historic resources that enjoy local zoning protection
and improving awareness of the benefits that those designated areas enjoy.
3. Ensuring compatible development that preserves the character of Norfolk’s
historic neighborhoods, respecting the size, massing, and lot placement of
adjacent properties.
4. Streamlining review processes for applicants seeking to do work in local historic
districts to enhance customer service and make local historic district designation
more appealing to neighborhoods considering designation.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Identifying Land Use Strategies
o Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant Neighborhoods
o Ensuring Housing Choices for All
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Enjoying Daily Life

11-8 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised June 2015

Heritage Goal 1. Foster a greater awareness of Norfolk’s heritage for
residents and visitors.
Outcome H1.1. Increased information available to the public about Norfolk’s
historic resources.
Metrics:
o Number of communication methods utilized.
Action H1.1.1. Utilize a variety of communications methods, ranging from printed
materials, online information, and municipal television channels, to workshops and
lectures, to raise awareness of Norfolk’s historic resources and inform property
owners and design professionals about the need to maintain historic properties and
opportunities to revitalize historic properties.
Comments: Increasing awareness of Norfolk’s historic resources and of
available incentives, such as historic rehabilitation tax credits
and tax abatement, could encourage property owners to
rehabilitate historic structures.

Action H1.1.2. Provide information, including maps of routes between sites for
walking, bicycling, or driving tours, highlighting Norfolk’s history and architecture, as
defined by the Cannonball Trail, in a variety of forms such as brochures, websites,
and mobile applications.
Action H1.1.3. Provide programs related to historic preservation, continuing to use
those provided by the Norfolk Public Library and encouraging other City
departments to develop programs celebrating Norfolk’s history.

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-9
Revised June 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action H1.1.4. Continue to work with the Norfolk Society for Cemetery Conservation
to increase awareness of the historic and cultural value of those resources.
Outcome H1.2. Improved identification of historic landmarks and districts.
Metrics:
o Percent of known historic resources designated with a City-provided
marker.
Action H1.2.1. Develop a process for expanding Cannonball Trail markers.
Comments: The Cannonball Trail was created to focus on historic sites
and buildings in downtown, and has been expanded to
include more sites around the City of Norfolk.
Action H1.2.2. Identify new sites for Cannonball Trail markers.

Action H1.2.3. Develop a local plaque program to recognize contributing structures
in historic districts or sites that have local landmark designation.
Action H1.2.4. Identify historic district boundaries through vintage or special street
signs in historic districts.

Heritage Goal 2. Protect Norfolk’s historic resources.
Outcome H2.1. New and infill development that respects surrounding historic
properties and reflects the established architectural pattern.
Metrics:
o Percent of developable vacant lots in local and National historic districts
subsequently developed with appropriate buildings.

11-10 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised June 2015

Action H2.1.1. Develop local historic district design guidelines utilizing professional
standards, such as the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, as the
basis.
Action H2.1.2. Evaluate existing local historic district guidelines to determine the
need for updates at least every ten years.
Action H2.1.3. Encourage the use of design guidelines and pattern books in National
Register districts and other historic areas for new infill construction.

Outcome H2.2. An increased number of historic resources, including structures,
neighborhoods, and cultural resources, that are protected.
Metrics:
o Percent of the City’s identified historic buildings and neighborhoods with
some level of protection.
Action H2.2.1. Develop innovative approaches and strategies related to sea-level
rise adaptation in historic neighborhoods.
Action H2.2.2. Develop an up-to-date inventory of historic resources readily
available on the City’s website.
Action H2.2.3. Update the inventory of historic resources at least every ten years,
evaluating the historic significance of all buildings that are more than 40 years old.
Comments: As buildings and sites become 50 years old, they become
potentially eligible for historic designation, necessitating
regular surveys to ensure that potentially eligible resources
are evaluated. Because it is not feasible to prepare a survey
more often than every decade, evaluating all buildings more
than 40 years old ensures that all potentially eligible
resources have been evaluated.

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-11
Revised August 2017

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action H2.2.4. Identify funding sources for updates to the inventory of historic
resources.
Comments: There are two sources of funding for such an update: the City
budget and grant money through the Certified Local
Government (CLG) program, a program administered through
the Virginia Department of Historic Resources.
Action H2.2.5. Ensure that locally-designated landmarks are appropriate and
sensitive to their surroundings and historic character in both appearance and use.
Comments: ARB, City Planning Commission and staff will use the
Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and elements
of design, such as architectural styles, form, massing and site
context, to evaluate locally-designated landmarks.
Action H2.2.5. Revise the Zoning Ordinance to provide for designation of local
landmarks, including cultural resources.
Comments: There are single buildings, monuments, gardens, and
cemeteries of particular significance in the City, which are not
necessarily located within a larger historic district. Local
landmark designation would create a method for those
buildings to be recognized and offered local protection.
Action H2.2.6. Work with neighborhoods to gain support for new locally-designated
historic districts and landmarks.
Action H2.2.7. Communicate regularly with property owners in neighborhoods that
are designated local historic districts regarding the regulations and policies in those
districts.
Action H2.2.8. Discourage the performance of work in a local historic district
without a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA) through the implementation of
programs such as a system of fees or fines for not obtaining a COA.
Action H2.2.9. Utilize historic district design guidelines to promote the appropriate
maintenance and rehabilitation of existing structures in historic districts.

11-12 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised August 2017

Action H2.2.10. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit the reuse of nonconforming
historic structures.
Comments:

Currently, many nonconforming structures exist in historic
areas where the Zoning Ordinance does not allow for their
continued use. Providing avenues for their continued use, if
an applicant obtains a COA, could potentially save many
historic buildings from demolition

Action H2.2.11. Promote the appropriate reuse of existing historic structures
through zoning incentives.
Action H2.2.12. Promote reuse of historic structures through City marketing efforts
about programs such as tax abatement.
Action H2.2.13. Pursue the statutory authority to prevent demolition by neglect in
historic areas through heightened code enforcement.
Action H2.2.14. Preserve, protect, and promote Norfolk’s historic municipal
cemeteries through active conservation, education, and advocacy.

P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E | 11-13
Revised January 2018

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Heritage Goal 3.
Improve and streamline the Certificate of
Appropriateness process.
Outcome H3.1. Expedited review of projects going through the Certificate of
Appropriateness process.
Metrics:
o Percent change in the average amount of time a project takes to go
through the COA process.
Action H3.1.1. Eliminate the duplicative process of review by two bodies, the Design
Review Committee and the Planning Commission, in order to get a project approved.
Comments:

Requiring applicants for a COA to have their application
reviewed by multiple bodies adds time to the review process
and
introduces
the
potential
for
conflicting
recommendations.

11-14 | P R E SE R V I N G O U R H E R I T A G E
Revised January 2018

CHAPTER 12:
COOPERATION

FOSTERING

RESPONSIBLE

REGIONAL

“A commitment to regional cooperation, recognizing the importance of a
regional approach in the 21st Century.”

N

orfolk is located at the center of the Hampton Roads region of southeastern
Virginia, which is home to approximately 1.7 million people, making it the
largest metropolitan area between Washington, DC and Atlanta. As detailed in
Map RC-1, the region covers over 2,600 square miles across ten cities and six counties,
and is divided into two areas – the Peninsula and Southside – by the world’s largest
natural harbor, located where the confluence of the Elizabeth, James and Nansemond
Rivers flows into the Chesapeake Bay. Given this asset, much of the region’s history and
wealth is linked to the sea with tourism, port operations and the military all continuing
to be significant parts of the regional economy.
Vibrant metropolitan regions are expected to be key to growth and development in the
future. The full array of amenities, resources, and facilities across an entire region will
be compared to other metropolitan areas when attempting to attract or retain business
investment. The quality of transportation facilities, cultural amenities, and educational
and workforce development programs in a region, including university facilities and
programs, are of particular importance in the evaluation of potential business locations.
F O ST E R I NG R E SP ON SI B LE R E G I O NA L C O OP E R A T I O N | 12-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
MAP RC-1. HAMPTON ROADS REGION

Accordingly, continuing to work together as a region on these and other related issues
will be more important than concentrating on internal boundaries when working to
attract business investment, as well as the next generation of residents and workers.
The idea that all benefit when one part of the region benefits needs to be advanced.
There are significant structural challenges in Virginia that must be overcome to further
greater regional cooperation. Both the Dillon Rule, which limits the powers of local
governments while also enforcing a heavy reliance on property taxes for local revenues,
and the Independent City Statute, which removes a unifying governmental structure
over multiple jurisdictions, have negatively impacted regional cooperation in the
Commonwealth for decades. However, these hurdles are not insurmountable. The
federally mandated regional transportation planning process in Hampton Roads has
recently been strengthened to increase its effectiveness. Similar initiatives to improve
other key areas related to regional competitiveness will need to be supported so that
Hampton Roads can thrive in the global economy. Making regional cooperation
proactive should ensure that it becomes an everyday practice rather than an issue that
arises out of crisis.

12-2 | F O ST E R I N G R E S P ON SI B LE R E G I ONA L C O OP E R A T I O N

Certain services and issues affecting all jurisdictions
such as wastewater treatment and mass transit
services can be more efficiently addressed on a
region-wide basis. There are agencies providing
many of these services that should be supported and
strengthened. Other issues, such as affordable
housing, may represent an opportunity to improve
service effectiveness through a regional approach.
New challenges that have not previously been a
major part of the regional dialogue, such as the
impacts of sea level rise, are beginning to be
identified. Hampton Roads will be tested to develop
effective institutions to respond to these challenges
as well.
The City of Norfolk should play a significant
leadership role in addressing these regional issues.

KEY ISSUES
Based upon existing conditions and trends, the following are the key issues for Norfolk
related to regional cooperation:
1. Improving economic competitiveness through the enhancement of regional
amenities and services, especially related to education and transportation.
2. Ensuring the effective and efficient delivery of services best addressed on a
region-wide basis.
3. Supporting regional approaches to emerging issues which cross jurisdictional
boundaries.

IMPORTANT LINKAGES
The goals, outcomes, and actions outlined in this chapter are linked to goals, outcomes,
and actions found in the following chapters:
o Providing Transportation Options
o Enhancing Economic Vitality
o Promoting Environmental Sustainability
o Supporting Lifelong Learning
o Ensuring Housing Choices for All
o Delivering Quality Community Services
o Enjoying Daily Life

F O ST E R I NG R E SP ON SI B LE R E G I O NA L C O OP E R A T I O N | 12-3
Revised June 2014

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K

Regional Cooperation
competitiveness.

Goal

1.

Enhance

regional

economic

Outcome RC1.1. A vibrant and growing metropolitan region with the capacity to
compete successfully with similarly-sized regions in the eastern United States.
Metrics:
o Percent change in employment compared to other regions.
o Change in Hampton Roads average household income compared to other
regions.
Action RC1.1.1. Support development of a regional economic development strategy
to coordinate and guide business development efforts.
Action RC1.1.2. Improve marketing, both collectively and individually, of regional
assets to attract new business and investment to the region.
Action RC1.1.3. Explore opportunities for collaborations across jurisdictional
boundaries in order to reduce competition.
Comments:

Effective programs could serve to reduce the duplication in
the development and maintenance of arts/entertainment
venues and meeting space facilities across Hampton Roads.
Such opportunities may take the form of new revenue
sharing agreements that may require Commonwealth of
Virginia approval.

Action RC1.1.4.
Support the development of an efficient, multi-modal
transportation network, including high quality connections to other metropolitan
regions, to support new business investment and activity.
Action RC1.1.5. Support educational institutions, programs, and other related
workforce development efforts to help create and maintain a well trained and
qualified workforce.
Action RC1.1.6. Continue to work with all jurisdictions in Hampton Roads to
strengthen major regional assets, including the military, ports, medical institutions,
colleges and universities, and tourist destinations.

12-4 | F O ST E R I N G R E S P ON SI B LE R E G I ONA L C O OP E R A T I O N
Revised June 2014

Action RC1.1.7. Encourage Norfolk’s water supply surplus to be marketed and
utilized as a major regional asset to attract development.
Action RC1.1.8. Partner with Norfolk’s General Assembly members to develop
consensus positions to enhance regional competitiveness.

Regional Cooperation Goal 2. Ensure efficient regional service delivery.
Outcome RC2.1. Efficient coordination of regional services.
Action RC2.1.1.
Support continued development of regional approaches to
addressing new federal and State requirements for both wastewater and
stormwater management.
Action RC2.1.2.
Study and adopt a new regional waste management structure for
post-2018, when existing arrangements are due to expire.
Action RC2.1.3. Encourage a coordinated approach to the development of
affordable housing, involving all affected agencies.
Action RC2.1.4. Work with agencies throughout the region to develop and
implement policies and programs addressing special needs populations.
Action RC2.1.5. Continue to work in partnership with various levels of government
and public agencies to address homelessness on a regional basis.
Action RC2.1.6. Explore possible efficiencies to be gained by coordinating the
purchase of municipal goods and services.

F O ST E R I NG R E SP ON SI B LE R E G I O NA L C O OP E R A T I O N | 12-5
Revised June 2014

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Action RC2.1.7. Continue to improve regional mitigation strategies, emergency
preparedness, responsiveness, and evacuation planning.
Comments:

The region has recently completed an update to the
Southside Hampton Roads Hazard Mitigation Plan to
address potential hazards on a regional basis.

Regional Cooperation Goal 3. Support a regional approach to emerging
issues that cross jurisdictional boundaries.
Outcome RC3.1. More effective regional approaches to emerging issues of concern.
Metrics:
o Percent change in regional air quality.
o Percent change in linear feet of unbuffered lower intensity residential
land and more intensive land uses along Norfolk’s borders.
Action RC3.1.1. Coordinate land use planning at jurisdictional boundaries to reduce
land use conflicts.
Action RC3.1.2. Support the development of a regional greenhouse gas emissions
inventory and emission reduction targets.
Action RC3.1.3. Coordinate with regional partners and programs working on issues
related to sea level rise.
Action RC3.1.4. Continue to explore regional approaches, including partnerships
with universities and other organizations, to address new and emerging region-wide
issues and topics.

12-6 | F O ST E R I N G R E S P ON SI B LE R E G I ONA L C O OP E R A T I O N
Revised August 2017

CHAPTER 13: IMPLEMENTING PLANORFOLK2030

P

laNorfolk2030 must be used in its entirety, including both text and maps, to
guide decision making about physical development and public infrastructure. It is
intended to be sufficiently flexible to respond to changes in development
patterns with amendments made when determined to be necessary. For the plan to be
useful, it should be regularly monitored and reviewed to ensure that it remains an
effective tool to help achieve the vision for the City of Norfolk.

Implementation Goal 1. Ensure that plaNorfolk2030 remains a valuable
tool for decision-making.
Outcome IP1.1. plaNorfolk2030 is used to guide decision making about physical
development and public infrastructure.
Metrics:
o Percent of approved land use changes, Capital Improvement Program
(CIP) projects, NRHA funding requests, and Community Development
Block Grant (CDBG) applications that are consistent with plaNorfolk2030.
Action IP1.1.1. Review all land use applications for consistency with plaNorfolk2030.
Action IP1.1.2. Ensure that proposed capital improvement projects are consistent
with the recommendations of plaNorfolk2030 as required by the Code of Virginia.
Action IP1.1.3. Encourage City departments and outside agencies to develop work
plans that are consistent with the recommendations of plaNorfolk2030.
Action IP1.1.4. Evaluate grant requests, including Community Development Block
Grant applications, against the requirements of plaNorfolk2030.
Outcome IP1.2. Effective tools that support the implementation of plaNorfolk2030.
Metrics:
o Percent of biannual implementation status reports on time.
o Percent of reviews of plaNorfolk2030 conducted within five years of
adoption or the preparation of a review.
Action IP1.2.1. Regularly evaluate City codes to ensure that the goals of
plaNorfolk2030 are being implemented effectively.
Comments:

Tools for implementing plaNorfolk2030 include the Zoning
I M P LE M E NT I N G P LA N O R F O LK 2030 | 13-1

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
Ordinance, the Capital Improvement Program, and the
subdivision ordinance, as well as other ordinances within the
Code of the City of Norfolk.
Action IP1.2.2. Regularly review the best practices of local governments throughout
the United States and amend Norfolk’s codes, where appropriate, to ensure that City
codes are as effective as possible.
Action IP1.2.3. Prepare a report evaluating the status and effectiveness of
plaNorfolk2030 implementation at least every two years that includes the following
elements:
o An evaluation of the data defined in the metrics.
o An outline of the obstacles or problems in plan implementation.
o Recommendations for new or modified goals, outcomes, metrics or actions.
Action IP1.2.4. Review plaNorfolk2030, in its entirety, every five years to determine
if there is a need for any of the following types of amendments:
o Adjustments to specific goals, outcomes, metrics, or actions.
o Updates to entire chapters or added chapters.
o Preparation of a new plan.
Outcome IP1.3. plaNorfolk2030 is amended whenever conditions warrant.
Metrics:
o Number and type of amendments approved.
Action IP1.3.1. Consider amending plaNorfolk2030 when it is determined that there
has been a change in conditions since adoption, when a plan or study evaluates an
area at a greater level of detail, or when it is discovered that an error has been
made.
Action IP1.3.2. Ensure newly completed area plans are adopted by reference into
plaNorfolk2030, amending plaNorfolk2030 to reflect the recommendations of the
area plan, where appropriate (see Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant
Neighborhoods chapter).
Action IP1.3.3. Process amendments to plaNorfolk2030 according to requirements
established by the Code of Virginia and the Code of the City of Norfolk.

Implementation Goal 2. Implement plaNorfolk2030.
The following matrix summarizes action items and the entities responsible for them. Its
organization reflects the specific strategies outlined in this plan, and it includes

13-2 | I M P LE M E N T I N G P LA N O R FO LK 2030

timeframes and approximate cost ranges for each action. In addition, the Comments
column includes important cross-references among strategies that should be addressed
in a coordinated manner.
The timeframe divides actions into four categories:
• Ongoing
Routine and continuous with no specified end date
• Immediate
Completed within 3 years
• Short-Term
Completed within 3 to 5 years
• Mid-Term
Completed within 5 to 8 years
• Long-Term
Will take longer than 8 years to complete
Note that the timeframes are for completion of an action, not its initiation. Many
actions will begin sooner but will not be complete until the entire plan is complete.
Cost categories are:
• Existing resources
• Up to $100,000
• $100,000 to $250,000
• $250,000 to $1 million
• Over $1 million
• Several million
Glossary for Lead Responsibility:
Abbreviation
Department or Agency
Attorney
City Attorney
Budget
Budget and Strategic Planning
CF
Cultural Facilities, Art and Entertainment
CMO
City Manager's Office
COR
Commissioner of the Revenue
Communications
Communications
Development
Development
EM
Emergency Management
Finance
Finance
Fire
Fire
GS
General Services
HRT
Hampton Roads Transit
HS
Human Services
I M P LE M E NT I N G P LA N O R F O LK 2030 | 13-3
Revised June 2015

T HE G E N E R A L P LA N O F N OR FO L K
IGR
IT
Libraries
ND
NPH
NPS
NRHA
OEH
Planning
Police
PW
RPOS
Treasurer
Utilities

Intergovernmental Relations
Information Technology
Libraries
Neighborhood Development
Norfolk Public Health
Norfolk Public Schools
Norfolk Redevelopment and Housing Authority
Office to End Homelessness
City Planning
Police
Public Works
Recreation, Parks and Open Space
Treasurer's Office
Utilities

13-4 | I M P LE M E N T I N G P LA N O R FO LK 2030
Revised June 2015

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

COMMENTS

Land Use Goal 1. Ensure that the type and quality of land uses will complement or enhance the community’s physical characteristics.
Use the Future Land Use Map, in conjunction with the
text, to guide the location and character of
development.
Implement residential land use categories that reflect
existing successful neighborhood patterns with regard
to lot width, structure type, setback, and vehicular use
areas.
Implement non-residential land use categories to
meet market demand while recognizing the
importance of accessibility, infrastructure capacity,
and the relationship in scale and use to the
neighborhood.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LU1.1.4

Support mixed use development in appropriate
locations in Residential Mixed, Multifamily Corridor,
Multifamily, Commercial, and Office designated areas
provided that it includes a combination of two or
more land uses, at least one of which is residential and
the other is non-residential, it includes the use
depicted on the Future Land Use Map as part of the
mixed use development, and it includes
complementary uses.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LU1.1.5

Support the development of uses in Transit Supportive
Areas (areas surrounding selected rail stations) that
create opportunities for a mix of employment and
residential activity that promotes transit, bicycle, and
pedestrian activity, while discouraging low intensity
auto-oriented uses.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Related to T1.2.8.

LU1.1.6

Utilize a series of Character Districts to establish
differing development standards based on the existing
predominant development character in an area.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Related to
LU1.2.3.

Use Vision 2100 to guide land use decisions.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LU1.1.1

LU1.1.2

LU1.1.3

Outcome LU1.1. Future
land use map and
LU1.1.7
categories that respect
neighborhood
characteristics and meet
LU1.1.8
the demand for each type
of use.
LU1.1.9
LU1.1.10

Encourage development in flood resilient areas that
are served by existing municipal services and
infrastructure.
Evaluate any potential changes in land use
classification to Multifamily or Multifamily Corridor
residential using the criteria as defined.
Ensure that new multifamily housing is designed to
meet the criteria as defined.

LU1.1.11

Encourage the creation of new exclusively-commercial
locations in nodes at the intersections of roads rather
than at isolated mid-block locations.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LU1.1.12

Identify potential areas for transition or intensification
of land use.

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Evaluate reuse options for city-owned facilities that
are planned for closure.
Apply the standards of an Urban Development Area
(UDA), as defined by the Code of Virginia § 15.22223.1, to development, including infrastructure, in
the Downtown character district, the Military Circle
Area and the Wards Corner UDA Area (as outlined in
“Creating and Maintaining Healthy and Vibrant
Neighborhoods” chapter), and in Transit Supportive
Areas.
Ensure that new development in the Traditional and
Coastal Character Districts fits with the predominant
development character in those areas by
incorporating more strict form standards into the
Zoning Ordinance.

Development;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

*

*

LU1.1.13

LU1.1.14

LU1.1.15

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-5

Related to
EV1.1.1.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

LU1.1.16

Develop pattern books to clearly establish the
appropriate development form and style for all new
development in the Traditional and Coastal Character
Districts, and for new commercial and multifamily
development in the Suburban Character District.

Planning

Short-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

LU1.2.1

Develop new zoning tools reflecting best practices to
address lot width, building placement, building form,
landscaping, stormwater, and vehicular uses areas
(driveways, parking lots, and garages) to ensure that
development is compatible with surrounding land
uses.

Planning

Immediate

Anticipates
$100,000 to comprehensive
$250,000 revision of the
Zoning Ordinance.

LU1.2.2

Develop appropriate land use transitions between
lower-intensity residential areas and other more
intense land uses by amending the zoning ordinance
to provide appropriate vegetated buffers to ensure
meaningful separation of uses or by applying slightly
more intense uses adjacent to lower-intensity uses,
with the transition occurring at the rear property lines.

Planning; RPOS

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Related to
LU1.1.6.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

*

*

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

*

*

Planning

*

*

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LU1.2.3

LU1.2.4

LU1.2.5

LU1.2.6
LU1.2.7

LU1.2.8
Outcome LU1.2.
Development regulations
and practices that support
a quality built and natural LU1.2.9
environment.

LU1.2.10

Establish parking standards within the Character
Districts based on the most current research on
parking by the Institute of Traffic Engineers, and other
professionally-recognized organizations.
Update zoning regulations to ensure the adequate
provision of open space in multifamily residential and
planned development districts.
Revise zoning regulations, developing new commercial
categories and appropriate regulations that better
reflect the current function of commercial areas as
neighborhood-serving, community-serving, or regionserving.
Encourage the use of design guidelines wherever
possible to ensure compatible development.
Ensure that all new development in designated floodprone areas complies with the city’s flood protection
regulations.
Evaluate the impact of potential sea level rise when
reviewing development proposals and future changes
to development regulations.
Ensure that development is resilient by updating
zoning regulations to strengthen stormwater
management requirements, mitigate the impact of
flooding and expand the use of energy efficient
equipment, materials, and design.
Continue enforcement of the Airport Safety Zone
Overlay District, restricting heights in designated
areas.

LU1.2.11

Ensure that zoning regulations reflect noise zones and
accident potential zones so that residents are aware of
the impact of airport regulations on land use.

Planning

*

*

LU1.2.12

Do not support any proposed increase in intensity of
uses located in incompatible noise and accident
potential zones and seek opportunities to reduce the
intensity of those incompatible uses.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LU1.2.13

LU1.2.14

LU1.2.15

Coordinate land use planning with institutions,
including the military, colleges and universities, and
medical institutions, to ensure compatibility with
surrounding neighborhoods.
Enhance buffering, landscaping, and parking standards
for newly established automobile sales and repair
establishments.
Work to bring existing automobile sales or repair
establishments into compliance with applicable codes,
with an emphasis on buffering, landscaping, and
parking.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-6

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Part of work
program for
ES2.1.10.
Part of work
program for
ES2.1.1 and
ES2.1.3.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1. See Map
LU-3 and Table LU3.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

LU1.2.16

Ensure that the design and scale of public utility
structures are in keeping with the surrounding uses
and that the placement minimizes physical or visual
obstructions and avoids environmentally sensitive
areas.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LU1.2.17

Develop design guidelines for public utility structures.

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

LU1.2.18

Work to ensure that building codes continue to
provide adequate protection from potential hazards.

Planning; ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

COMMENTS

Neighborhoods Goal 1. Enable neighborhood residents to take ownership of their neighborhoods.
N1.1.1

N1.1.2

Identify a core group of engaged neighborhood
residents with the capacity to affect change, and work
ND; Communications
with them prepare and implement community
engagement strategies.
Continue to support citizen organizations in their
ND; Communications
efforts to improve their communities.

N1.1.3

Support neighborhood activities and celebrations,
such as picnics, festivals, and other similar events.

ND; Communications

*

*

Part of work
program for
N1.1.2.

N1.1.4

Invest in programs, such as the Neighbors Building
Neighborhoods Academy, that build capacity among
residents to formulate and assume ownership of
neighborhood values, standards, and goals.

ND; Communications

*

*

Part of work
program for
N1.1.2.

Foster the development of community partnerships,
capitalizing on the energy and expertise of institutions
such as universities and the faith-based community
and the capabilities of neighborhood residents, to
ND; Communications
improve neighborhood character, maintenance, and
safety while maximizing the effective use of city
resources.

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Continue to involve neighborhood civic leagues, and
other similar organizations, in the decision-making
process for city actions such as land use changes.

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Immediate

*

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ND

Immediate

Existing
Resources

ND; NRHA

Ongoing

$250,000-$1
Million

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Outcome N1.1. Enhanced
resident and civic
N1.1.5
organization capacity to
shape their communities.

N1.1.6

N1.1.7

N1.1.8

N1.1.9

ND;
Communications;
Planning

Expand civic outreach efforts to more effectively
involve traditionally underserved individuals, such as ND; Communications
youth.
Promote Norfolk’s centralized call center to improve
the City’s effectiveness in responding to neighborhood ND; Communications
needs.
Develop a public outreach program to educate
neighborhood residents regarding city programs
ND; Communications
available to them and their responsibilities related to
accessing those services.

Part of work
program for
N1.1.2.

Neighborhoods Goal 2. Enhance the vitality of Norfolk’s neighborhoods.
N2.1.1

N2.1.2

Outcome N2.1. Improved N2.1.3
maintenance of private
property.
N2.1.4

Investigate reported code violations within 72 hours of
an initial report and continue to address all related
issues until they are resolved.
Encourage the continuation of the landlord
registration programs offered by some colleges and
universities located in the City and the expansion of
such programs to other institutions.
Continue to support home maintenance and other
home improvement initiatives.
Promote maintenance of rental housing by educating
tenants about their rights and responsibilities under
the Virginia Residential Landlord and Tenant Act.

N2.1.5

Encourage the return of abandoned housing to safe
and useful occupancy, through the Derelict Structures
Program, employing demolition of structures that
cannot be rehabilitated as a last resort.

ND

Ongoing

Several
Million

N2.2.1

Simplify the manner in which information on
infrastructure maintenance needs can be collected
from residents by creating a single online reporting
mechanism.

IT; GS

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Outcome N2.2. Improved
maintenance
publicincluded in another action as noted under comments.
* Cost for thisofaction
property and
infrastructure.

13-7

Spend
approximately
$500,000 annually
on this program.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

N2.2.2
Outcome N2.2. Improved
maintenance of public
N2.2.3
property and
infrastructure.

N2.2.4

N2.2.5

N2.3.1

Outcome N2.3. Strong
and safe neighborhoods
and neighborhood
residents.

N2.3.2

N2.3.3

N2.3.4

N2.4.1

N2.4.2

N2.4.3
Outcome N2.4.
Neighborhoods of choice
that embrace people from N2.4.4
a diversity of incomes and
ethnicities.
N2.4.5
N2.4.6

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

ND; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW

Immediate

Existing
Resources

PW; Police

Mid-Term

Several
Million

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Police

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Police; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS; Libraries

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Encourage neighborhoods, businesses, and other
organizations to take a larger role in cleaning and
maintaining public spaces.
Evaluate the need for changes to the Residential
Permit Parking Program to more effectively apply to
neighborhoods that have high demand for on-street
parking and a limited supply, particularly those
neighborhoods near major institutions.
Evaluate the City’s lighting standards and ensure that
neighborhoods meet the standard by maintaining
existing street lights and adding new lights where they
are appropriate.
Encourage civic leagues to invite owners of rental
properties to join neighborhood organizations to
promote improved property maintenance.
Continue police outreach efforts, such as the Police
Assisted Community Enforcement (PACE) program,
that improve communications between
neighborhoods and the Police.
Continue to support programs such as Neighborhood
Watch, Business Watch, and Citizen’s Police Academy,
and initiatives such as Safer by Design, that increase
neighborhood surveillance and reduce opportunities
for crime to occur.
Support after-school and other programs which
provide youth with positive alternative activities.
Evaluate development regulations to identify ways
that the principles of “Crime Prevention Through
Environmental Design” (CPTED) can be incorporated
into the design of newly-developed and redeveloped
areas.
Encourage the creation of neighborhoods in which
people choose to live by enabling residents to take
ownership of their neighborhoods.
Strengthen neighborhoods by giving existing housing
programs a strategic focus and introducing new
programs to increase the impact (see Ensuring
Housing Choices for All chapter).
Support efforts to increase demand and
competitiveness for housing in neighborhoods in
transition.
Deconcentrate clusters of poverty and prevent future
clusters by facilitating new housing options for lowincome residents in communities of opportunity.
Develop a coordinated, long term strategy to address
obsolete public housing communities.
Ensure that affordable housing is located in proximity
to employment centers, service centers, and public
transit.

N2.4.7

Support the efforts of the “creative class” as they work
to enhance the vibrancy of Norfolk’s neighborhoods.

N2.4.8

Support the development of appropriately scaled and
located neighborhood retail uses.

COMMENTS

Related to N2.3.4.

Planning; Police;
RPOS

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1. Related
to N2.3.2.

ND

*

*

Part of work
program for
N1.1.2.

ND; Resilience

Long-Term

$250,000 to
$1 million

ND; Resilience

Long-Term

*

ND; Resilience

Long-Term

Several
Million

NRHA; Resilience

Mid-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning; NRHA

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Mid-Term

Existing
Resources

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning;
Development;
Communications
Development;
Planning

Funding included
in N2.4.2.

Neighborhoods Goal 3. Enhance neighborhood character, design, and visual identity.
N3.1.1

Develop and prioritize a list of improvements to public
spaces, including streets, which can serve to enhance
PW; RPOS; Planning
visual character and improve the pedestrian
environment.

N3.1.2

Develop a program for the establishment of gateways
to residential neighborhoods that are behind
commercial corridors.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.
Outcome N3.1.
Neighborhoods with a

13-8

PW; Planning

Funding for
implementation
was historically
provided up to
$250,000 annually.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

N3.1.3

N3.1.4
Outcome N3.1.
Neighborhoods with a
well-defined sense of
N3.1.5
identity that reflects their
history, architecture, and
physical environment.
N3.1.6

N3.1.7
N3.1.8

N3.1.9

N3.1.10

N3.1.11

Develop design criteria for new public buildings and
spaces to ensure that they enhance the character of
the neighborhoods in which they are located and,
where appropriate, can serve as iconic places (see the
Delivering Quality Community Services chapter).
Continue to work with neighborhoods on the
installation and maintenance of neighborhood
identification signs.
Encourage the use of pattern books and design
guidelines, both within and outside the City’s historic
districts, to achieve a higher level of architectural
quality.
Evaluate the effectiveness of Pedestrian Commercial
Overlay (PCO) zoning districts, and consider potential
ordinance revisions to ensure that they serve the
purpose for which they were intended.
Evaluate the effectiveness of programs intended to
revitalize Norfolk’s commercial corridors.
Develop design guidelines for use in evaluating grant
funding proposals for aesthetic improvements of
commercial properties.
Revise development regulations to ensure that infill
residential development is compatible with
surrounding properties.
Identify locations where it may be appropriate and
financially feasible to relocate above-ground utility
lines underground.
Continue to promote the Real Estate Ambassadors
Program to communicate the quality of Norfolk’s
neighborhoods to real estate professionals throughout
the region.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

PW; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Planning; RPOS

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.6.

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Planning; ND;
Development

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Planning

*

*

PW; Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Planning

Ongoing

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.
Does not include
implementation.

Neighborhoods Goal 4. Implement an area planning policy.
N4.1.1
N4.1.2

Evaluate the need to prepare an area plan based on
defined criteria.
Inform area planning approach based on location(s)
status in Vision 2100 .

Existing
Resources
Existing
Resources

N4.1.3

Consider neighborhoods as a whole during the area
planning process, as well as potentially-affected areas
located just outside the neighborhood.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N4.1.4

Present proposals for plan initiation to City Council in
a formal setting for action.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N4.1.5

Ensure that residents affected by a plan may actively
participate in its development by forming an advisory
committee and by conducting community meetings at
appropriate times throughout the planning process.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N4.1.6

Evaluate past plans prepared for an area prior to
beginning a new planning effort, considering whether
those plans achieved their stated goals and, if not,
whether those goals are desirable.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Include in each plan clear, measurable statements of
desired outcomes, supplemented by a series of
attainable strategies, including proposed capital
projects, program changes, and ordinance revisions, as
well as lead responsibility, projected timeframes, and
implementation costs for each.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Outcome N4.1. Plans are
focused on areas
experiencing or in need of
change.
N4.1.7

N4.1.8
N4.1.9

N4.1.10

Address the role of potential partners in the plan
implementation process.
Submit completed area plans for formal action by City
Council and rescind prior plans that are in conflict, to
ensure a clear direction for the area.
Adopt area plans by reference into plaNorfolk2030 ,
and amend plaNorfolk2030 to reflect the
recommendations of the area plan, where
appropriate.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-9

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

N4.1.11

Submit a formal report on area plan implementation
to City Council at least every three years, including an
update on the status of implementation actions, an
assessment of the plan’s success at achieving the
stated goals, and a recommendation on any revisions
that may be needed.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Budget

Mid-Term

Several
Million

Planning; Budget

Short-Term

Planning; Budget

Mid-Term

Development;
Planning; PW;
Utilities; RPOS

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Libraries; PW

Mid-Term

Several
Million

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

NRHA; Planning

Long-Term

Several
Million

COMMENTS

Neighborhoods Goal 5. Continue the implementation of area plans.
N5.1.1

Continue to implement the following actions in the
Broad Creek area.
N5.1.1(a). Support NRHA’s continued development of
new rental and homeownership units.
N5.1.1(b). Support NRHA implementation of the
redevelopment plan for Moton Circle.
N5.1.1(c). Continue to support the revitalization of
Grandy Village.

Broad Creek

N5.1.1(d). Work with NRHA on the development of a
South Brambleton revitalization plan.
N5.1.1(e). Develop a new library facility for the Broad
Creek community, possibly in conjunction with a new
elementary school.
N5.1.1(f). Continue to support the Salvation Army’s
development of a Ray and Joan Kroc Corps Community
Center in the Broad Creek community.
N5.1.1(g). Prepare a master plan for Douglas Park and
acquire properties, as appropriate, to assist in the
implementation of the plan.
N5.1.1(h). Initiate acquisition within the Spartan
Village neighborhood in order to assist with the
implementation of improved area-wide stormwater
controls.

N5.1.2

City has begun
implementation.
Completion will
take several
million. Related
to ES2.1.5.
Part of work
program for
ES2.1.5.

PW; GS

Long-Term

Several
Million

PW

*

*

N5.1.2(a). Revise regulations to require that new nonresidential buildings be at least two stories.

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

N5.1.2(b). Revise regulations to require that retail and
commercial uses have strong ground-floor visual and
access connections to the sidewalk, with walkability
and sense of place as a priority.

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

PW; RPOS

Long-Term

Several
Million

PW; Planning

Mid-Term

*

RPOS

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

PW

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

PW

Ongoing

*

HRT

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.1(i). Continue to evaluate and implement flood
protection alternatives in the Spartan Village area as a
city priority.
Continue to implement the following actions in the
Central Hampton Boulevard area.

N5.1.2(c). Continue to implement the Hampton
Boulevard Improvement Project (HBIP) with lane and
signal improvements, sidewalks, landscaping and
burial of utilities.
N5.1.2(d). Develop access management plans for
Hampton Boulevard and the 26th Street industrial
corridor in conjunction with property owners.
N5.1.2(e). Require the installation of additional street
trees, wider verges, and other planting strip
vegetation, with streetscape improvements on
Hampton Boulevard, Killam Avenue, and Colley
Avenue a priority.
N5.1.2(f). Explore the possibility of on-street parking
where absent.
N5.1.2(g). Evaluate traffic calming measures, such as
neckdowns, to prevent cut-through traffic on
neighborhood streets where needed.
N5.1.2(h). Study transit travel patterns and demand
to identify potential service enhancements, including
improved signage and bus shelters, and coordinate
service timing, routes, stops and information between
HRT and ODU shuttle services.

pton Boulevard

Several
Million
Several
Million

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-10

Part of work
program for
T1.1.9.

Part of work
program for
T1.1.8.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

ACTION

Central Hampton Boulevard

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

N5.1.2(i). Revise development regulations to restrict
the location of parking areas to the side or rear of
buildings and ensure building entrances front onto a
public right-of-way to ensure a pedestrian orientation.
N5.1.2(j). Revise development regulations to ensure
active uses around parks and plazas, encourage retail
awnings over sidewalks and street tree species that
provide shade.
N5.1.2(k). Engage the local community in the
development of gateway treatments at major entry
points using public art, street trees and other
landscaping elements.
N5.1.2(l). Engage local artists to create unique
enhancements to streets and parks, particularly at
entrance points to the Central Hampton Boulevard
area.
N5.1.2(m). Encourage the development of a
wayfinding program by ODU in the vicinity of the
University and University Village.
N5.1.2(n). Develop a PCO for North Colley Avenue.

N5.1.3.

N5.1.2(o). Revitalize North Colley commercial areas by
improving public infrastructure and providing grant
funding for aesthetic improvements of commercial
properties.
N5.1.2(p). Develop a special purpose zoning district
for Knitting Mill Creek, working with civic leagues,
property owners, and businesses to identify preferred
uses and standards.
N5.1.2(q). Work with businesses to find appropriate
relocation sites, preferably in the 26th Street
industrial, research, and office district or elsewhere
within Norfolk.
N5.1.2(r). Revise development regulations to ensure
that buildings and landscaping contribute to the
character of the neighborhoods and the form of public
open spaces, including streets.
N5.1.2(s). Support ODU’s development of the
southern phase of University Village, while
encouraging retail uses in the area that appeal to the
broader community.
Implement the following actions in the Chelsea
Business District area.
N5.1.3(a). Create a pedestrian and bicycle friendly
streetscape by improving sidewalks and lighting,
installing new pedestrian-scale signage, benches, trash
receptacles, and bike racks, and enhancing crosswalks
and sharrows/bicycle lanes where appropriate.

Chelsea Business District

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

CF; Planning; RPOS

Long-Term

Up to
$100,000

CF; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning;
Development

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

PW; ND

Ongoing

Several
Million

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Development

Long-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning; RPOS

*

*

Development;
Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

PW

*

*

Part of work
program for
T1.3.1.

PW

*

*

Part of work
program for
T1.3.1.

Development

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

*

*

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

*

*

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

N5.1.3(b). Focus short-term streetscape
improvements on the west side of Orapax Avenue,
emphasizing its role as the primary pedestrian corridor
into the business district.
N5.1.3(c). Consider extending the Enterprise Zone to
include the Chelsea Business District.
N5.1.3(d). Consider zoning modifications to support
the development of vendors and pop-up businesses.

N5.1.3(e). Encourage the re-use of existing vacant
Development
buildings.
N5.1.3(f). Consider changing the zoning designations
of industrially-zoned properties utilized for
Planning
commercial or residential purposes to better reflect
current and potential uses.
N5.1.3(g). Support neighborhood efforts to make the
Chelsea Business District a testing ground for
innovative sustainability approaches, such as wind and PW; RPOS; Planning
solar energy installations, rain gardens, and other
similar methods.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-11

COMMENTS

Related to
EV1.1.4.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Revised September 2019

Che
Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

Colonial Place-Riverview

N5.1.4.

N5.1.5.

N5.1.3(h). Support the placement of public art
throughout the business district, with an emphasis on
wayfinding.
Continue to implement the following actions in the
Colonial Place-Riverview area.
N5.1.4(a). Market the Riverview Village area as a
location of specialty stores as a means of attracting
small, independent retailers.
N5.1.4(b). Encourage the reuse of the Riverview
Theater as a component of the redevelopment of the
st
area along Granby Street south of 41 Street.
N5.1.4(c). Continue to support improvements to the
pedestrian environment in Riverview Village through
zoning, such as the Pedestrian Commercial Overlay,
incentives, and capital improvements.

Cottage Line
Downtown

CF

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ND; Planning;
Development; PW

Ongoing

$250,000 to Related to
$1 Million EV1.1.4.

Development;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

COMMENTS

Planning

*

*

RPOS; PW; Planning

Mid-Term

Up to
$100,000

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

N5.1.5(e). Develop a system of pedestrian and bicycle
paths to improve connections to Community Beach
Park, Ocean View Golf Course, and Lake Modoc.

PW; RPOS

Long-Term

*

Part of work
program for
T1.3.5. Related to
N5.1.22(d).

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

PW

Mid-Term

*

Part of work
program for
T1.3.5.

PW; RPOS

Long-Term

Several
Million

PW; CF; RPOS

Short-Term

Over $1
Million

PW

Short-Term

Several
Million

Planning

Immediate

Planning

Immediate

Planning

*

*

Part of work plan
for DL3.1.6.

PW

*

*

Part of work
program for
T1.3.1.

Continue to implement the following actions in the
Downtown area.

N5.1.6(b). Extend the esplanade from Town Point
Park to Harbor Park and ensure that the design
accommodates bicycles.
N5.1.6(c). Reconfigure Civic Plaza to include new
driveway access from St. Paul’s Boulevard, a memorial
to commemorate the End of Massive Resistance, and
enhanced landscaping.
N5.1.6(d). Develop the new Col. Samuel Slover
Norfolk Main Library, the new Courthouse Complex,
and the Multi-Modal Transfer Station at Harbor Park.
N5.1.6(e). Support the expansion of the Chrysler
Museum.
N5.1.6(f). Revise parking regulations in the area north
of Brambleton Avenue.
N5.1.6(g). Support the creation of an "Arts District" in
the area north of Brambleton Avenue, between St.
Paul's Boulevard and the Chrysler Museum, by making
regulatory changes to encourage the appropriate mix
of uses.
Implement the following actions in the Downtown
Arts District area.
N5.1.7(a). Create a pedestrian and bicycle friendly
streetscape by improving sidewalks, installing new
pedestrian-scale lighting and landscape planting areas,
enhancing crosswalks and sharrows/bicycle lanes, and
reducing speed limits where appropriate.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

trict

COST
CATEGORY

N5.1.5(b). Revise development regulations to ensure
that new buildings maintain the continuity of the
street face.
N5.1.5(c). Develop streetscape standards for East
Ocean View Avenue appropriate for its intended
purpose as a residential boulevard.
N5.1.5(d). Develop a gateway overlay zoning district
for East Ocean View Avenue, between Cape View
Avenue and Chesapeake Boulevard.

N5.1.6(a). Improve pedestrian crossings of Waterside
Drive, Brambleton Avenue, and St. Paul’s Boulevard.

N5.1.7

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

Continue to implement the following actions in the
Cottage Line area.
N5.1.5(a). Encourage mixed use development along
East Ocean View Avenue between Chesapeake Street
and the Ocean View Golf Course.

N5.1.6

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

13-12

Related to T1.3.7.

Related to T2.1.1
and DL2.1.1.

Existing
Resources
Existing
Resources

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

PW

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

CF

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

PW

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

ND; RPOS

Short-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

PW

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CF

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Planning

*

*

N5.1.8(a). Establish an East Little Creek Road Task
Force to guide future organizational, regulatory,
marketing, and financial decisions along the corridor.

Development

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.8(b). Work with the East Little Creek Road Task
Force to explore the development of a branding
theme that could be applied throughout the corridor
to define it as a place.

ND; RPOS

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.8(c). Work with the East Little Creek Road Task
Force to identify areas for appropriately scaled
commercial uses consistent with action LU1.2.5.

Planning;
Development

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

ND

Ongoing

*

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development; GS;
Planning

Long-Term

Several
Million

RPOS; PW; Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

PW; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS; PW

Ongoing

*

PW

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

ACTION

Downtown Arts District

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

East Little Creek Road Corridor

N5.1.8

N5.1.7(b). Consider converting two travel lanes of W.
Virginia Beach Boulevard between Granby Street and
Boush Street to on-street parking defined by
landscaping.
N5.1.7(c). Evaluate options for re-configuring or
redeveloping the Harrison Opera House parking lot to
create a more active, green street edge along W.
Virginia Beach Boulevard.
N5.1.7(d). Consider re-configuring Monticello Avenue
to create new on-street parking areas that could
potentially double as spaces for pop-up retail or a
farmer’s market.
N5.1.7(e). Create gateways to the district at the
intersections of Granby Street with Brambleton
Avenue and Virginia Beach Boulevard, Llewellyn
Avenue with W. Virginia Beach Boulevard, and E.
Olney Road with Monticello Avenue and St. Paul’s
Boulevard.
N5.1.7(f). Explore the possibility of transforming
Magazine Lane into a small-scale market street and
central square for the district.
N5.1.7(g). Encourage the re-use of existing buildings
and the development of new buildings on excess
surface parking.
N5.1.7(h). Support the development of innovative art
installations.
N5.1.7(i). Consider zoning modifications to support
the development of artist studios and arts
entertainment venues, vendors and pop-up
businesses, and artist housing.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
East Little Creek Road Corridor.

N5.1.8(d). Revitalize the East Little Creek Road
commercial areas by continuing to provide grant
funding for aesthetic improvements of commercial
properties.
N5.1.8(e). Encourage redevelopment of the
commercial area between Chesapeake Boulevard and
Sewells Point Road.
N5.1.8(f). Identify and pursue acquisition and
demolition of targeted properties on both sides of
East Little Creek Road.
N5.1.8(g). Develop a streetscape plan for the East
Little Creek Road corridor between Meadow Creek
Road and Sewells Point Road.
N5.1.8(h). Encourage stronger transit, bicycle, and
pedestrian linkages throughout the East Little Creek
Road commercial areas and along Chesapeake
Boulevard between East Little Creek Road and
Fishermans Road.
N5.1.8(i). Ensure that Tarrallton Park is accessible to
both pedestrians and bicyclists from the intersection
of East Little Creek Road and Halprin Drive.
N5.1.8(j). Explore options for improving access to the
L. C. Page Branch Post Office.
N5.1.8(k). Develop a gateway overlay zoning district
for the intersection of Shore Drive and East Little
Creek Road.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-13

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Related to
LU1.2.5.

Part of work plan
for EV1.1.4.
Related to
LU1.1.12.

Part of work plan
for DL1.1.6.

Related to
N5.1.8(f).

Revised September 2019

E
Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

N5.1.9

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
T1.1.11 and
ES1.1.5.

PW

*

*

N5.1.8(m). Enhance buffering, landscaping, and
parking standards for newly established automobile
sales and repair establishments along E. Little Creek
Road.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.8(n). Work to bring existing automobile sales or
repair establishments along E. Little Creek Road into
compliance with applicable codes, with an emphasis
on buffering, landscaping, and parking.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.9(a). Encourage neighborhood-oriented
commercial activities along Shore Drive and the shores
of Pretty Lake east of the Shore Drive Bridge.

Development;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.9(b). Encourage redevelopment of the shopping
center at Shore Drive and Pretty Lake Avenue.

Development

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

Planning

*

*

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

RPOS; PW; Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

RPOS; PW; Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

ND

Immediate

Several
Million

Related to
EV1.1.4.

PW

*

*

Part of work
program for
ES2.1.5.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW

*

*

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Continue to implement the following actions in the
East Ocean View area.

N5.1.9(e). Revise development regulations governing
building height and separation to ensure maintenance
of views to the Chesapeake Bay and Pretty Lake, and
to provide opportunities for access to the water.

East Ocean View

COST
CATEGORY

N5.1.8(l). Improve pedestrian and bicycle crossings of
East Little Creek Road at its intersection with Halprin
Drive.

N5.1.9(c). Encourage development of commercial
uses on Shore Drive south of Pretty Lake that are
compatible with and complement the adjacent
waterfront uses.
N5.1.9(d). Acquire the large parking lot east of Shore
Drive and south of Pretty Lake so that it may be
redeveloped as a waterfront marina.

N5.1.9(f). Develop a gateway overlay zoning district
for the intersection of Shore Drive and Little Creek
Road.
N5.1.9(g). Revise development regulations to
encourage the development of affordable infill
housing, utilizing appropriate design criteria, in the
area north of Pretty Lake.
N5.1.9(h). Develop streetscape standards for East
Ocean View Avenue appropriate for its intended
purpose as a residential boulevard.
N5.1.9(i). Develop streetscape standards for Shore
Drive, south of Pretty Lake, appropriate for its
intended purpose as a waterfront commercial area.
N5.1.9(j). Revitalize Shore Drive commercial areas by
improving public infrastructure and providing grant
funding for aesthetic improvements of commercial
properties.
N5.1.9(k). Continue to evaluate and implement flood
protection alternatives in the East Ocean View area as
a city priority.
N5.1.9(l). Consider potential waterway conflicts with
military operations when evaluating development
proposals in the Little Creek/Fisherman’s Cove area.

N5.1.10

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

N5.1.9(m). Improve public infrastructure on streets
west of Shore Drive, evaluating the need for
sidewalks, stormwater facilities, and street
improvements.
Continue to implement the following actions in the
Fairmount Park area.
N5.1.10(a). Support paper street closures to provide
for side yards and opportunities for infill.
N5.1.10(b). Encourage local banks and lending
institutions to develop community partnerships to
provide special support to residents and buyers.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-14

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Part of work plan
for ES2.1.5.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

N5.1.10(c). Consider restricting on-street parking to
one side of the street to reduce the impact of parking
on traffic flow.

PW

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.10(d). Work with the Army Corps of Engineers to
develop a plan for improving the area at the end of
Somme Avenue for pedestrian enjoyment as a part of
a wetlands mitigation project.

Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.10(e). Develop special recreational programming
targeted to residents in and around Fairmount Park.

RPOS

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.10(f). Explore the feasibility of developing a
pedestrian connector linking Shoop and Barraud
Parks, including walkways along the Lafayette River.

PW; RPOS

Long-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

N5.1.10(g). Develop gateway treatments for the
Lafayette Boulevard Triangle, Cromwell Drive at
Tidewater Drive, Tidewater Drive at Shoop Avenue,
and Lafayette Boulevard at Tidewater Drive.

PW; RPOS

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Development; ND

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ACTION

Fairmount Park

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

N5.1.10(h). Support the organization of an area
business association.
N5.1.10(i). Market the commercial areas of the
neighborhood to new community oriented retailers
and service interests.
N5.1.10(j). Support NRHA acquisition of land
necessary for new development opportunities.
N5.1.10(k). Support NRHA acquisition of underutilized
properties on the southeast corner of Tidewater Drive
and Lafayette Boulevard for potential conversion to
retail uses.

N5.1.10(l). Develop an attractive community
gathering place in the vicinity of the intersection of
Lafayette Boulevard and Brest Avenue.

Fort Norfolk-Medical Center

N5.1.11

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

*

*

Planning; PW; RPOS

Long-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.11(c). Encourage stronger transit, pedestrian,
and bicycle connections from Fort Norfolk to Ghent.

PW; HRT; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Continue to implement the following actions for the
Greater Ghent area.
N5.1.12(a). Create an promenade linking Harrison
Opera House with the Chrysler Museum.
N5.1.12(b). Explore the feasibility of a Business
Improvement District (BID).

PW; RPOS; Planning

Long-Term

Development

Short-Term

N5.1.10(m). Support rehabilitation of residential
developments along Lafayette Boulevard.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Fort Norfolk-Medical Center area.
N5.1.11(a). Revise development regulations to require
building heights to step down to the water to maintain
views.
N5.1.11(b). Ensure that the waterfront area is
accessible to both pedestrians and bicyclists.

Several
Million
Existing
Resources

Defining
"community
gathering place"
will be done with
existing resources.
Additional
resources may be
needed for
implementation.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.
Related to T1.3.7.

Related to T1.3.5.

Greater Ghent

N5.1.12

ND; Planning; RPOS

COMMENTS

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-15

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

N5.1.12(c). Encourage stronger transit, bicycle, and
pedestrian linkages from Ghent to Downtown Norfolk
and Fort Norfolk.

PW; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.12(d). Utilize historic district design guidelines to
ensure the development of appropriately designed
new buildings, and promote the appropriate
maintenance and rehabilitation of existing structures
in the Ghent historic district.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Related to H2.1.2.

PW

*

*

Part of work plan
for ES2.1.5.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IGR

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

N5.1.13(d). Working with property owners, create
opportunities for commercial redevelopment in Five
Points through land assembly and acquisition.

Development

Long-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.13(e). Study and implement traffic circulation
improvements on Chesapeake Boulevard, north of the
Five Points intersection, to improve safety, access, and
circulation for commercial properties.

PW

Mid-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.13(f). Implement the streetscape plan for
Sewell’s Point Road to improve pedestrian safety and
provide an attractive environment for development of
neighborhood serving commercial establishments,
such as lighting, plantings, and signage.

PW; RPOS

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Short-Term

Several
Million

*

*

Mid-Term

Several
Million

Long-Term

Several
Million

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ACTION

Greater Ghent

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

N5.1.13

N5.1.12(e). Continue to evaluate and implement flood
protection alternatives in the Hague area as a city
priority.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Greater Norview/Five Points area.
N5.1.13(a). Work to attract new businesses to the
district that would improve pedestrian use of Sewells
Point Road, as indicated by an area market study.

Greater Norview/Five Points

N5.1.13(b). Encourage the improvement of the
existing post office and its parking lot.
N5.1.13(c). Evaluate the traffic pattern at the
interchange of Chesapeake Boulevard with Interstate
64.

Outcome N5.1. Support
for the following actions
in designated areas.

N5.1.14

N5.1.13(g). Evaluate the effectiveness of the PCO to
Planning
and amend as needed to best fit the needs of future
neighborhood development.
N5.1.13(h). Evaluate the need and potential locations
PW; Development
for a city parking facility to provide additional parking
for area businesses.
N5.1.13(i). Consider modifying code requirements to
Planning
encourage economic development and the reuse of
vacant structures.
N5.1.13(j). Evaluate the potential for converting Hugo
PW
Street from a one way to a two way street.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Greater Wards Corner area.
N5.1.14(a). Identify and pursue acquisition and
Development; GS; ND
demolition of properties on both sides of East Little
Creek Road.
N5.1.14(b). Ensure proper maintenance of City
RPOS
acquired properties.
N5.1.14(c). Pursue opportunities for passive and
active recreation in partnership with the community
RPOS; ND
on City-owned properties in Denby Park for short term
use.
N5.1.14(d). Encourage townhomes and market-rate
Planning
rentals in residentially-designated areas along East
Little Creek Road.
N5.1.14(e). Evaluate land use changes fully
Planning;
considering current and future transportation
Development
opportunities.
N5.1.14(f). Support relocation of the head-in parking
in the Titustown retail area in order to facilitate
streetscape improvements and the use of the parking
lots located at the rear of the retail buildings.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-16

PW; Planning

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Private partners
would be asked to
bring resources

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Development;
Planning

Immediate

$250,000 to
$1 Million

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Immediate

*

RPOS

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Planning

Long-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning/
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.14(n). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Implement near
term and funded transportation improvements

Public Works/
Transportation

Short-Term

Several
million

Already funded

N5.1.14(o). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Conduct
detailed feasibility study for a combined intermodal
station area.

Planning/ HRT

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Could be funded
through HRTPO or
HRT

N5.1.14(p). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Support and
coordinate with the upcoming DEIS for the east side
alignment for the extension of light rail or other high
capacity transit to Naval Station Norfolk.

Planning/HRT

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

HRT is funding the
DEIS

ACTION

Greater Wards Corner

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

N5.1.14(g). Support the redevelopment of commercial
properties at the intersection of Granby Street and
Little Creek Road.
N5.1.14(h). Continue to monitor traffic conditions at
the intersection of East Little Creek Road and Virginian
Drive to ensure that appropriate traffic conditions are
maintained.
N5.1.14(i). Consolidate and relocate points of access
in the commercial areas along Granby Street and Little
Creek Road.
N5.1.14(j). Improve pedestrian and bicycle
connections throughout Wards Corner, especially to
and in the commercial areas.
N5.1.14(k). Pursue opportunities to add passive and
active recreation space, landscaping, and trees
throughout the Wards Corner area.
N5.1.14(l). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Promote the
implementation of the plan through the City’s
development review process.
N5.1.14(m). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Engage with key
landholders in creative redevelopment and land
assemblage opportunities.

Mid-Term

N5.1.14(r). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Conduct a
preliminary feasibility study for a trail connection to
the Terminal Boulevard Trail.

RPOS/ Public Works

Immediate

N5.1.14(s). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Implement
strategic near-term green street and landscaping
enhancements where feasible.

Public Works/ RPOS

Mid-Term

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning /
Development

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning/
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.14(v). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Create a blockby-block strategy for property-owner outreach and
implementation of public/private agreements.

N5.1.14(w). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Develop phased
roadway and public realm improvements to transform
Public Works/ RPOS
Wards Corner into a walkable center based on
Traditional Neighborhood Design principles.
N5.1.15

Part of work
program for
T1.3.5.

Cost estimate for
design and
construction
Cost estimate for
Up to
feasibility study
$100,000
only
Estimate for 2-4
$100,000 to streetscape/
$250,000 landscaping
projects

N5.1.14(q). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Develop a trail
Public Works/ RPOS
connection from the Wellness Center to Wards Corner

N5.1.14(t). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Creatively use
zoning to incentivize a framework for a walkable
mixed-use setting for Wards Corner.
N5.1.14(u). [Wards Corner UDA Area] Identify and
pursue funding options to support the development
and maintenance of necessary infrastructure to
support the plan.

COMMENTS

Over $1
million

Long-Term

Several
million

Includes eventual
completion of all
proposed trails,
sidewalks, parks
and plazas

Continue to implement the following actions for the
Huntersville area.
N5.1.15(a). Develop and implement a streetscape
plan to improve the appearance of Tidewater Drive.

RPOS; PW; Planning

Mid-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.15(b). Evaluate possible alternatives for
extending light rail from Downtown to the north along
Church Street.

PW; Planning; HRT

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-17

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Long-Term

Over $1
million

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Mid-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

ND

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.16(a). Explore making Fawn and Gazel Streets
two-way streets.

PW

Mid-Term

Existing
Resources

N5.1.16(b). Market underutilized warehouse spaces
for reuse.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Long-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Hampton Roads
Transit

Immediate

Several
million

Hampton Roads
Transit

Mid-Term

Several
million

Public Works

Short-Term

$250,000 to
$1 million

ACTION

Huntersville

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

N5.1.15(c). Better identify Huntersville and improve its
image with tools such as gateway signage,
PW; RPOS; CF
landscaping, lighting, banners, public art, and
enhanced crosswalks.
N5.1.15(d). Encourage land uses and businesses that
Planning
are compatible with the neighborhood by utilizing
zoning tools such as conditional zoning.
N5.1.15(e). Support business development that
Development; NRHA
provides employment through workforce
development initiatives.
N5.1.15(f). Upgrade and expand recreational
opportunities by renovating the Huntersville
RPOS; GS
community center and expanding programming
opportunities.
N5.1.15(g). Improve the physical condition of the
neighborhood through code enforcement, landlord
ND
and tenant outreach, and participation in other rental
education programs.
N5.1.15(h). Reduce speeding in the neighborhood with
Police; PW
various traffic calming measures such as electronic
surveillance.
N5.1.15(i). Support transit use by evaluating the
PW; HRT
appropriateness of existing bus stop locations and
installing bus shelters and trash containers.
N5.1.15(j). Enhance neighborhood safety by
encouraging neighborhood activities such as the
Police; ND
Neighborhood Watch Program and by addressing
trespassing and loitering issues.
N5.1.15(k). Ensure quality infill development that
preserves affordability by creating a plan book and
creating development opportunities on vacant lots.

Mid-Town
Industrial

N5.1.16

N5.1.17

N5.1.15(l). Explore tools and funding sources for
rehabilitation of existing housing.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Mid-Town Industrial Area.

Implement the following actions in the Military Circle
Area.
N5.1.17(a). Coordinate redevelopment efforts with
planning for the extension of light rail or other high
capacity transit and other infrastructure planning.
N5.1.17(b). Do not approve short-term developments
that will impede the realization of the long-term
vision.
N5.1.17(c). Conduct studies (DEIS) and coordinate
planning necessary for the determination of the locally
preferred alternative for an east side alignment for the
extension of light rail or other high capacity transit to
Naval Station Norfolk.
N5.1.17(d). Advance preliminary engineering and final
environmental documentation for the locally
preferred alternative for the extension of light rail or
other high capacity transit and develop a project
funding plan.
N5.1.17(e). Conduct transportation studies needed to
best realize the Vision Plan including a future major
street network framework, layout, and functionality
analysis, including the potential reconfiguration of the
Military Highway and Virginia Beach Boulevard and
the existing interchange.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

y Circle

COMMENTS

13-18

Already funded

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

ACTION

Military Circle

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

Military Highway Corridor

COST
CATEGORY

COMMENTS

N5.1.17(f). Outline a new street pattern to create
“green and complete streets” with a walkable urban
Public Works,
grid and connections to surrounding areas, and
Recreation Parks and
identify needed right-of-way improvements to support Open Space, Planning
future development.

Mid-Term

Funding for
$100,000 to
construction in
$250,000
Action N5.1.17(r).

N5.1.17(g). Locate civic facilities and recreation
amenities throughout the area to serve both the new
community and the surrounding neighborhoods.

Public Works with
operational
departments

Mid-Term

Funding for
$100,000 to
construction in
$250,000
Action N5.1.17(r).

N5.1.17(h). Address stormwater management issues
to support new development.

Public Works

Mid-Term

Funding for
$100,000 to
construction in
$250,000
Action N5.1.17(r).

N5.1.17(i). Outline utility improvements needed to
support new development.

Utilities, Public
Works

Mid-Term

Funding for
$100,000 to
construction in
$250,000
Action N5.1.17(r).

N5.1.17(j). Develop a parking strategy to
accommodate a phased redevelopment of the area.

General Services

Mid-Term

Funding for
$100,000 to
construction in
$250,000
Action N5.1.17(r).

Planning

Immediate

$100,000 to
$250,000

Planning

Short-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

Public Works with
operational
departments

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Development

Ongoing

N5.1.17(p). Develop a branding strategy that supports
the creation of a new identity for the area.

Marketing

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.17(q). Outline a phased buildout approach for
the redevelopment of Military Circle Mall and the
surrounding area the introduction of light rail.

Planning,
Development

Mid-Term

Existing
Resources

N5.1.17(r). Identify and implement the appropriate
oversight mechanism to facilitate the redevelopment
of Military Circle Mall and the surrounding area.

Planning,
Development

Long-Term

Several
million

Development

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.18(b). Work with the Military Highway Corridor
District Task Force to explore the development of a
branding theme that could be applied throughout the
corridor to define it as a place.

ND; RPOS

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.18(c). Support the redevelopment of the
shopping center at the northeast corner of North
Military Highway and Norview Avenue, and the flea
market site on the east side of North Military Highway
near Lynn Street.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.18(d). Develop a streetscape plan for the
Military Highway corridor that can be implemented in
conjunction with roadway improvements.

RPOS; PW; Planning

Short-Term

Several
Million

ND

Immediate

*

PW

Short-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.17(k). Develop and adopt zoning tools to create a
framework as a walkable urban setting, centered on
transit.
N5.1.17(l). Create a pattern book to give guidance to
new development to support the creation of walkable
urban spaces and the integration of green
infrastructure.
N5.1.17(m). Identify and pursue funding options to
support the development and maintenance of
necessary infrastructure to support the plan.
N5.1.17(n). Explore incentives necessary to realize the
plan.
N5.1.17(o). Leverage city-investments as a catalyst for
private sector investment.

N5.1.18

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

Continue to implement the following actions for the
Military Highway Corridor.
N5.1.18(a). Establish a Military Highway Corridor
District Task Force to guide future organizational,
regulatory, marketing, and financial decisions along
the corridor.

N5.1.18(e). Revitalize Military Highway commercial
areas by providing grant funding for aesthetic
improvements of commercial properties.
N5.1.18(f). Support the continued roadway
improvements to North Military Highway from Lowery
Road to Interstate 64.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-19

Existing
Resources
Existing
Resources

Part of work
program for
EV1.1.4.

Revised September 2019

Military Highway

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

N5.1.18(g). Enhance buffering, landscaping, and
parking standards for newly established automobile
sales and repair establishments along Military
Highway.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.18(h). Work to bring existing automobile sales or
repair establishments along Military Highway into
compliance with applicable codes, with an emphasis
on buffering, landscaping, and parking.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.19(a). Promote the transition of the MonticelloGranby Corridor from predominantly industrial and
automobile-oriented uses to a higher intensity of
mixed use development, including residential.

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.19(b). Ensure that all new development projects
provide an active streetscape for Granby Street and
Monticello Avenue by constructing buildings with
active first floor uses, with façades built to the right-ofway line, and with at least 50% first floor
transparency.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.19(c). Ensure that new development does not
negatively impact the residential and institutional
character of the surrounding neighborhoods by
providing adequate parking for all uses and adequate
open space for residential uses.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

RPOS; PW; Planning

Short-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.20(e). Promote the transition of Colonial Avenue
between the railroad tracks and W. 26th Street from
predominantly industrial uses to a mixture of
commercial, office, and residential uses.

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

N5.1.20(f) Ensure that all new development and
substantial redevelopment along Colonial Avenue
between the railroad tracks and W. 26th Street
provides an active streetscape by providing buildings
set back no more than 10 feet from the right-of-way
line with substantial first floor transparency, locating
parking areas to the side or rear of buildings and
screening parking areas that must be located adjacent
to the right-of-way, and by limiting uses to those of a
pedestrian-oriented nature.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
resources

N5.1.20(g) Promote the transition of Granby Street
between the railroad tracks and 29th Street from
predominantly industrial uses to a mixture of
commercial, office, and residential uses.

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ACTION

Monticello-Granby Corridor

N5.1.19

Park Place

N5.1.20

COMMENTS

Continue to implement the following actions for the
Monticello-Granby Corridor.

N5.1.19(d). Consider expansion of the G-1 zoning
district, or the creation of one or more additional
zoning districts throughout the corridor to ensure
appropriate development form.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Park Place area.
N5.1.20(a). Do not permit fast food restaurants with
drive-throughs and businesses that sell alcohol for offpremise consumption.
N5.1.20(b). Evaluate the potential conversion of
Llewellyn and Colonial Avenues to 2-lane roadways
with raised medians.
N5.1.20(c). Develop and implement streetscape plans
for 35th Street Granby Street, Colonial Avenue, and
Llewellyn Avenue that support enhanced pedestrian
activity and safety.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-20

Revised September 2019

Park Place

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
resources

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Ongoing

PW

Short-Term

NRHA

Long-Term

NRHA

Immediate

NRHA

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Development; NRHA

Immediate

Existing
Resources

N5.1.21(e). Create a development program that
outlines necessary infrastructure for redevelopment of PW; Utilities; NRHA
the St. Paul’s area and determine funding needs.

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.21(f). Create a feasible financing strategy for the
NRHA; Development
redevelopment of the St. Paul’s area.

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

NRHA; Development;
N5.1.21(g). Develop a feasible phasing strategy for the
PW; Utilities; RPOS;
redevelopment of the St. Paul’s area.
Planning

Ongoing

*

Part of work
program for
N5.1.21(e).

N5.1.21(h). Develop St. Paul’s as a mixed-use, mixedincome neighborhood.

NRHA; Planning

Long-Term

Several
Million

Related to
N5.1.21(l),
N5.1.21(m),
N5.1.21(n).

N5.1.21(i). Create a human capital plan, family-based
case management, a workforce development strategy,
an education and youth development initiative, and
comprehensive health programs.

NRHA

Immediate

Over $1
Million

RPOS; Planning

Long-Term

Several
Million

PW

Long-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.21(l). Improve community form in St. Paul’s
through site placement, massing, and other design
aspects of buildings that address their urban setting,
while embracing churches and civic buildings as
landmarks, providing a network of complete streets,
and incorporating public art throughout.

Planning; PW; RPOS;
CF

Long-Term

*

Part of work
program for
N5.1.21(h).

N5.1.21(m). Reconnect the missing links in the
transportation infrastructure of the St. Paul’s area,
including improved connections at the perimeter and
improved bicycle and transit access.

PW; HRT; Planning

Long-Term

*

Part of work
program for
N5.1.21(h).

ACTION

N5.1.20(h) Ensure that all new development and
substantial redevelopment along Granby Street
between the railroad tracks and 29th Street provides
an active streetscape by providing buildings set back
no more than 10 feet from the right-of-way line with
substantial first floor transparency, providing building
facades of at least two stories along Granby Street,
locating parking areas to the side or rear of buildings
and screening parking areas that must be located
adjacent to the right-of-way, by providing street trees
or other similar landscaping between the sidewalk and
the road, and by limiting uses to those of a pedestrianoriented nature.

St. Paul's

N5.1.21

N5.1.20(i). Continue efforts to promote economic
development by supporting business education and
networking opportunities.
N5.1.20(j). Monitor the availability and location of
automobile parking on the 35th Street Corridor.
N5.1.20(k). Evaluate the need for traffic calming
measures along the 35th St. Corridor.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
St. Paul’s area.
N5.1.21(a). Replace public housing units in Tidewater
Gardens on a one-for-one basis.
N5.1.21(b). Ensure tenant relocation that is sensitive
to resident needs.
N5.1.21(c). Provide a housing mix matching the
anticipated demographic profile of future public
housing households in St. Paul’s.
N5.1.21(d). Develop partnerships to facilitate the
implementation of redevelopment in the St. Paul’s
area.

N5.1.21(j). Provide recreation and open space
opportunities throughout St. Paul’s.
N5.1.21(k). Develop necessary stormwater
infrastructure, utilizing green design wherever
possible, while coordinating with citywide stormwater
initiatives.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-21

COMMENTS

Existing
Resources
Up to
$100,000

Several
Million
$250,000 to
$1 Million

Related to
N5.1.21(g).

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

N5.1.22

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

N5.1.21(n). Remove barriers to pedestrian mobility in
the St. Paul’s area and ensure a safe and inviting
walking environment throughout.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Southside area.

Southside

N5.1.22(a). Evaluate the reuse of the Campostella
Landfill site as a potential recreational amenity.

West Ocean View

N5.1.23

Willoughby

N5.1.24

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

PW; Planning

Long-Term

*

RPOS

Immediate

Several
Million

Mid-Term

Several
Million

Short-Term

Over $1
Million

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.22(b). Support the redevelopment of the salvage
Development;
yard on East Indian River Road as a new industrial
Planning
park.
N5.1.22(c). Remove the damaged Steamboat Creek
PW
(Springfield Avenue) Bridge.
N5.1.22(d). Ensure public access to the water by
incorporating public walking trails in the
Planning; RPOS
redevelopment of the land on the east and west sides
of the Campostella Bridge.
N5.1.22(e). Study the feasibility of creating a walking
Planning; PW; RPOS
trail linking the neighborhoods south of East Indian
River Road to the Indian River Creek.
N5.1.22(f). Develop a streetscape plan for the
Campostella Road and Wilson Road corridors, paying
special attention to the intersections of Campostella
RPOS; PW; Planning
Road and Wilson Road, and Wilson Road and Indian
East Indian River Road.

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
N5.1.21(h).

Does not include
implementation.

Related to
DL1.1.7.

N5.1.22(g). Develop streetscape plans for the portion
of South Main Street north of Berkley Avenue.

RPOS; PW; Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

N5.1.22(h). Revitalize Campostella Road commercial
areas by providing grant funding for aesthetic
improvements of commercial properties.

Development

Immediate

*

Development

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; RPOS

Long-Term

Several
Million

RPOS

Short-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

PW; RPOS

Long-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

*

*

PW

Long-Term

Several
Million

PW

Long-Term

Several
Million

N5.1.22(i). Facilitate the organization of a business
association in Southside to promote retail
development.
N5.1.22(j). Continue to support the annual Berkley
Neighborhood Reunion and other community-based
activities.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
West Ocean View area.
N5.1.23(a). Support the application of mixed-use
zoning in the area on the south side of West Ocean
View Avenue, between 1st View Street and Mason
Creek Road, in order to encourage the development of
a pedestrian-friendly “town center”.
N5.1.23(b). Explore opportunities to modify the
existing Tidewater Drive terminus in order to create a
park setting west of Mason Creek Road.
N5.1.23(c). Improve the entrances to Community
Beach Park and Sarah Constant Park.
N5.1.23(d). Explore opportunities to provide
connections between the Ocean View Golf Course and
Community Beach Park, such as redevelopment of the
“senior center” site.
Continue to implement the following actions for the
Willoughby area.
N5.1.24(a). Support renovation of traditional
cottages.
N5.1.24(b). Revise development regulations in the
area south of West Ocean View Avenue, restricting
building heights to no more than three stories except
along the West Ocean View Avenue frontage.
N5.1.24(c). Improve the intersection of West Ocean
View Avenue and 4th View Street.
N5.1.24(d). Enhance truck movements from the I-64
interchange at 15th View Street by improving Bayville
Street and the intersection of West Ocean View
Avenue and 13th View Street.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-22

Part of work
program for
EV1.1.4.

Related to
N5.1.5(e).

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Revised September 2019

Willoughby

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

N5.1.24(e). Work with the Navy to evaluate potential
th
reuse opportunities of the federally-owned land at 4
View Street.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Planning

Mid-Term

Existing
Resources

COMMENTS

Transportation Goal 1. Connect residents and visitors with business, employment, shopping, educational, and activity centers through a safe
and efficient multi-modal regional transportation system.
T1.1.1

T1.1.2

T1.1.3

T1.1.4

T1.1.5

T1.1.6
Outcome T1.1. A street
and highway system that
allows people and goods
to be moved safely,
conveniently, and
efficiently.

T1.1.7

T1.1.8

T1.1.9

T1.1.10

Monitor congestion levels and strive for low or
moderate congestion on all roadway segments at peak
times and prioritize improvements on those roads that
are rated severe congestion.
Consider revising the Zoning Ordinance to require
submission of a traffic impact analysis for new projects
that are projected to generate over 5,000 new daily
trips.
Support efforts to address existing congestion at entry
points to the City through the development of
additional bridges and tunnels.
Optimize the operation of the existing roadway
network through signal timing and technological
advances.
Use the Long Range Roadways Improvements Map
and Vision 2100 to assist in decision making on major
roadway improvements.
Coordinate new roadway projects with civic leagues,
business associations, and institutions in order to
mitigate roadway construction impacts.
Improve access to neighborhoods and employment
centers with traffic sign and signal enhancements, as
well as roadway condition and intersection
improvements.
Evaluate and implement traffic calming strategies such
as pedestrian bulbouts, speed bumps, and stop signs,
where appropriate, in conjunction with transportation
improvements or with spot efforts to protect
residential areas and other sensitive land uses from
the impacts of inappropriate volumes of through
traffic or excessive speed.
Evaluate and implement access management
strategies such as reductions in curb cuts or the
addition of medians, where appropriate, as part of any
transportation improvement or development proposal
to improve traffic operations and safety.
Continue to seek funding for the implementation of
roadway safety improvements in high crash rate areas
and rail crossings.

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Long-Term

Several
Million

PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; ND;
Development

*

*

PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

PW

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

PW; Budget

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

T1.1.11

Ensure roads, bicycle facilities, sidewalks, and bridges
are upgraded and maintained at adequate levels.

PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

T1.1.12

Continue to support the use of Traffic Demand
Management strategies and programs such as
ridesharing, telecommuting, and staggered work hours
to increase the efficiency of existing transportation
systems.

CMO,
Communications

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

T1.2.1

Work with Hampton Roads Transit (HRT) to improve
transit connections to major Norfolk employers, such
as the Naval Base and hospitals, and other activity
centers, including universities, retail centers, the
Virginia Zoo and Norfolk Botanical Gardens, as well as
to Norfolk International Airport, the Port of Virginia,
and other transportation centers.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

T1.2.2

Work with HRT to improve transit service so that it is
more comfortable, convenient, and reliable.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Part of work
program for
N1.1.6.

Outcome T1.2. A
comprehensive transit
system that promotes
efficient transportation
options that are
environmentally sensitive.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-23

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

T1.2.3
Outcome T1.2. A
comprehensive transit
system that promotes
efficient transportation
T1.2.4
options that are
environmentally sensitive.
T1.2.5

T1.2.6

T1.2.7
T1.2.8

T1.3.1

T1.3.2

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

PW; Planning

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Planning; Budget

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Continue planning for a Multi-Modal Transportation
Center at Harbor Park to connect passenger rail, light
rail, regional bus, and ferry services.

Planning; PW; GS

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Planning; Budget

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

*

*

Continue seeking State and federal funds to improve
and expand the existing transit network.
Encourage land use patterns designed to support
transit, including compact, walkable, mixed use
developments.
Implement the Complete Streets Policy (Appendix B)
in order to develop, operate and maintain an
integrated, connected network of streets that are safe
and accessible for all people or chosen mode of travel,
in a balanced, responsible and equitable manner
consistent with and supportive of the surrounding
community.
Utilize regulatory standards for building placement to
create pedestrian-oriented environments in
Downtown, the Transit Oriented Development zoning
districts, and designated Pedestrian Commercial
Overlay zoning districts.

T1.3.3

Add sidewalks and bicycle facilities to reduce gaps
between segments in established neighborhoods and
PW; Planning; RPOS
developed areas, with particular focus around schools,
hospitals, parks, and transit stops.

T1.3.4

Continue to remove obstacles to handicapped
accessibility throughout the City.

PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

T1.3.5

Improve pedestrian and bicycle crossings of major
streets where necessary.

PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

T1.3.6

Revise the Zoning Ordinance to encourage sustainable
travel modes with provisions for bicycle parking, as
well as dedicated parking spots for carpools and lowenergy vehicles, in the design of new facilities.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

T1.3.7

Develop and maintain a map of safe bicycle routes in
the city, considering the recommendations of
Norfolk’s officially designated bicycle advisory panel
and provide the map to entities such as HRT for
distribution and inclusion in city and regional
wayfinding materials.

PW; RPOS

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

Continue to fund and implement the
recommendations of the City of Norfolk Bicycle and
Pedestrian Strategic Plan (Appendix B).

PW; RPOS

Mid-Term

Several
Million

Implement recommended proposed bicycle facilities
from the bicycle facilities map (Map T-7) in
conjunction with any transportation improvements in
the identified corridors and also through stand-alone
programs and funds made available for such purposes.

PW; RPOS

Mid-Term

Several
Million

PW; Budget

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Outcome T1.3. An
expanded pedestrian and
bicycle network that
T1.3.8
promotes improved public
health and provides
opportunities for
alternative forms of
T1.3.9
transportation.

T1.3.10

T1.3.11

COMMENTS

Work with HRT to ensure the placement of bus
shelters at all stops serving at least 50 passengers a
day in order to provide seating, weather protection,
and information to riders.
Explore the potential for a transit ridership incentive
program that offers reduced fares and yearly incentive
bonus.
Use the Long Range Transit Improvements Map and
Vision 2100 to assist in decision making on future
expansion of light rail, high speed rail, ferry services,
and other modes.

Seek funding from State and federal sources to aid
implementation of the bicycle map (Map T-7)
recommendations with priority given to the proposed
strategic corridors.
Work with neighboring jurisdictions to ensure that
bicycle facilities extend across boundaries where
feasible.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-24

Related to
LU1.1.5.

Part of work
program for
T1.3.1.

Related to
N5.1.12(a) and
N5.1.1.14(g).

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

T1.3.12

Ensure bicycle facilities are adequately maintained.

PW; RPOS

*

*

T1.3.13

Encourage, among motorists and bicyclists alike, a
culture of respect and shared usage by developing
informational materials and programs to be
distributed and made available in a variety of formats
to help educate cyclists and drivers about the rights
and responsibilities of cyclists and drivers in Virginia.

RPOS;
Communications

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Police

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

T1.3.14

T1.3.15

T1.3.16

T1.3.17

Provide additional training for police in order to
increase enforcement of laws related to pedestrians
and bicyclists.
Continue to support early education and access to
bicycle and pedestrian options through programs such
as Safe Routes to School.
Continue to explore the feasibility of re-using former
rail lines and former or underutilized rights-of-way for
trails and connections.
Explore innovative programs that offer expanded
transportation choices, such as bicycle or car share, in
Norfolk and in cooperation with other jurisdictions
and institutions.

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
T1.1.11.

Transportation Goal 2. Support the continued development of transportation linkages connecting Norfolk to the larger region, nation, and
world.
T2.1.1

T2.1.2

T2.1.3

T2.1.4
T2.1.5

T2.1.6
Outcome T2.1. Improved
and increased regional,
T2.1.7
national, and
international connections
for both people and
goods.
T2.1.8

T2.1.9

T2.1.10

T2.1.11

T2.1.12

Support development of the Multi-Modal
Transportation Center at Harbor Park to connect
passenger rail, light rail, regional bus, and ferry
services.
Evaluate the inclusion of multi-modal options in all
planning for new facilities crossing the waters
surrounding the City.
Cooperate with State and regional officials on
improvements to the highway network linking Norfolk
to the region and the nation.
Support improvements at congested key entrance
points to Norfolk to reinforce the City’s role as the
historic and economic center of Hampton Roads.
Support the maintenance and potential expansion of
intercity bus services connecting to Norfolk.
Support the re-establishment of intercity passenger
rail service to Norfolk with increased service
frequencies above the initial single daily train that is
currently proposed.

Planning; PW; GS

*

*

PW; Planning

*

*

IGR; PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

*

*

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CMO

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Support the establishment of high speed passenger
rail service in the US Route 460 corridor.

CMO; IGR

Long-Term

Existing
Resources

Support the implementation of the Norfolk
International Airport Master Plan to ensure its
continued role as the primary air travel facility for the
Hampton Roads region, while also working to protect
its unique natural environment and setting.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development; PW;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development; PW;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development; PW;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Support the implementation of the Virginia Port
Authority’s Master Plan for Norfolk International
Terminals, while also working to ensure that the
overall impacts of port operations on adjacent
communities are mitigated.
Pursue a sustainable multimodal freight system that
facilitates the efficient movement of freight and
people, supports a thriving economy, and protects the
natural and human environment.
Evaluate the impact of individual land use decisions on
the capacity of significant freight movement routes
and corridors.
Support the implementation of harbor channel and
rail improvement projects that could serve to increase
cargo traffic through Norfolk.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-25

Part of work
program for
T1.2.6. Related to
N5.1.6(d).
Part of work
program for
T1.2.6.

Part of work
program for
T1.1.3.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

COMMENTS

Economic Vitality Goal 1. Enhance economic health and increase employment opportunities through business retention and expansion and
business attraction.

EV1.1.1

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.1.2

Invest in infrastructure to attract and maintain
businesses.

PW; Utilities;
Development

Ongoing

*

EV1.1.3

Explore creative financing resources, such as Tax
Increment Financing and Business Improvement
Districts, for economic development activities.

Development;
Finance

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.1.4

Continue to encourage the revitalization of Norfolk’s
commercial corridors and nodes by improving public
infrastructure and promoting available grant funding
for aesthetic improvements of commercial properties.

Development; PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

EV1.1.5

Enhance the viability of Norfolk’s commercial corridors
and nodes by exploring options for creating parking.

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Over $1
million

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.1.6

Outcome EV1.1. An
enhanced environment
and resources to support
business expansion and
investment.

Support the intensification of land use in the Strategic
Economic Development Areas that have infrastructure
capacity and access (including transit) and
underutilized land based on its economic value.

EV1.1.7

Continue to support the designation of Norfolk as an
Enterprise Zone as well as the hosting of several
Historically Underutilized Business Zones (HUBzone) to
allow Norfolk businesses to have access to the
financial and tax incentives provided by these
programs.
Continue to support the Norfolk Economic
Development Authority's (EDA) efforts to provide
assistance to eligible businesses.

Related to
LU1.1.12.

See the Providing
Transportation
Options,
Delivering Quality
Community
Services, and
Enjoying Daily Life
chapters.

Related to
N5.1.2(o),
N5.1.4(c),
N5.1.8(d),
N5.1.9(j).

EV1.1.8

Provide technical assistance to businesses by guiding
them through city processes, hosting education and
training workshops on how to start or expand a
business, and coordinating financial options.

EV1.1.9

Evaluate the impact of city processes on doing
business, including zoning, permitting, and other
requirements, and modify where appropriate to
support business investment.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

EV1.1.10

Expand online City services to include permitting.

Planning; IT

Short-Term

Over $1
Million

Budget;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.1.11

EV1.1.12

EV1.1.13

EV1.1.14

EV1.1.15

EV1.1.16

When evaluating proposals to implement tolls or to
modify fees, consider the impact of the changes on
existing and future businesses and potential
investment.
Update the Comprehensive Economic Development
Strategy (CEDS) at least every 10 years to ensure that
the City remains current in its economic development
efforts and is able to respond to shifting
macroeconomic trends.
Continue to pursue major corporate headquarters.
Continue to evaluate economic opportunities,
including Strategic Economic Development areas,
utilizing Vision 2100 and other applicable plans and
studies.
Analyze potential City and NRHA land sales and
acquisitions in terms of their ability to be
transformative or advance resilience goals, using
Vision 2100 for guidance.
Continue to support Norfolk’s “working waterfronts,”
utilizing zoning and other tools, to strengthen and
protect waterfront commerce.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-26

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

EV1.2.1

Forge a closer relationship with the military to
capitalize on its presence in Norfolk and capture more
exiting military personnel by coordinating long term
comprehensive planning with the Navy.

Planning; CMO

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.2.2

Continue coordinating with the Virginia Port Authority
in long range planning, including intermodal
infrastructure advances and improvements, to support
Norfolk’s role as the leader in the maritime industry.

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.2.3

Capitalize on opportunities for additional port-related
investment, including import-export firms.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EV1.2.4

Coordinate long range planning with the universities,
colleges, and medical institutions to attract spinoff
investment in research and development and provide
opportunities for training.

Planning;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning;
Development

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Planning

*

*

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

EV1.2.5

EV1.2.6
Outcome EV1.2.
Expanded economic
activity that capitalizes on
EV1.2.7
Norfolk’s locational
advantages and economic
assets.
EV1.2.8
EV1.2.9
EV1.2.10

EV1.2.11

EV1.2.12

EV1.2.13
EV1.2.14

EV1.3.1

Outcome EV1.3. Lifelong
EV1.3.2
learning opportunities
that are responsive to
changing economic needs.
EV1.3.3

EV1.3.4

Support and promote Downtown Norfolk as the
business, financial, and cultural center of the Hampton
Roads region through continued marketing and
recruitment activities.
Develop a plan to ensure the continued vitality of
Norfolk’s historic waterfront, capitalizing on its role as
an economic catalyst.
Support the implementation of the Norfolk
International Airport Master Plan.

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
T2.1.8.

Support the efforts of the Norfolk Convention and
Visitors Bureau to promote Norfolk as a tourist,
boating, and convention destination.
Encourage the marketing of Norfolk's beaches and the
beachfront communities.
Promote the Half Moone Cruise and Celebration
Center as a gateway for cruise ships as well as a venue
for events.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development (Visit
Norfolk)

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Nauticus

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Work with other jurisdictions in the region to develop
and market a regional approach to tourism and
convention promotion and facility planning.

Development

*

*

Part of work
program of
RC1.1.6.

CF; Development

*

*

Part of work
program of
DL2.2.1.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Utilities;
Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Related to LL1.3.1.

Budget

Ongoing

Several
Million

Related to LL1.3.2.

Development

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Related to LL1.3.3.

Development

*

*

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Continue to recognize the importance of the arts as an
economic tool by coordinating with and promoting
the activities of arts organizations such as the Virginia
Arts Festival, the Virginia Opera, the Virginia Stage
Company, the Norfolk Botanical Garden, and the
Virginia Symphony Orchestra.
Support the recruitment and expansion of “Green”
businesses and manufacturers.
Encourage Norfolk’s water supply surplus to be
marketed and utilized as a major regional asset to
attract development.
Work with educational partners, both within and
outside of Norfolk, including universities, colleges, and
trade schools, to tailor their educational programs to
the changing opportunities presented by Norfolk’s
economy.
Support Norfolk Public Schools in efforts to provide
both college-track and trade education that is
responsive to economic opportunities.
Identify and provide opportunities for career training
and development of Norfolk residents that can lead to
jobs in Norfolk industries.
Ensure that updates to the CEDS reflect the
importance of the City’s higher education and
institutional partners as engines of economic
development.

Part of work
program for
EV1.1.12.

Environmental Sustainability Goal 1. Ensure high quality natural resources.
ES1.1.1
ES1.1.2

Reaffirm the City of Norfolk Chesapeake Bay
Preservation Area Program Supplement.
Revise metrics for water quality based on meeting
Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) standards, once
established.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-27

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

ES1.1.3

ES1.1.4
ES1.1.5

Continue to work with research institutions, such as
Old Dominion University and the Virginia Institute of
Marine Science, and environmental organizations,
PW; Planning
such as the Elizabeth River Project and the
Chesapeake Bay Foundation, to improve water quality
in Norfolk waterways.
Support implementation of the Lafayette River
Planning; PW; Budget
Watershed Master Plan .

COST
CATEGORY

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Mid-Term

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; PW

*

*

Incorporate bio-retention facilities, such as rain
gardens, in municipal landscaping for passive
treatment of stormwater using native plant species.

RPOS

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Encourage State action to update the Virginia Erosion
and Sediment Control Handbook to recognize
advances in erosion and sediment control techniques.

IGR; Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

ES1.1.10

Increase the extent of natural areas along the
Planning; RPOS; PW;
waterfront, using shoreline restoration projects such
Budget
as living shorelines, and consider incentives that could
encourage their use.

Ongoing

Several
Million

ES1.1.11

Develop criteria for defining environmentally sensitive
areas that can be mapped to assist in selecting
locations for shoreline restoration projects.

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

PW; Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

CMO

Immediate

Existing
Resources

PW; Utilities

Ongoing

Several
Million

RPOS; GS

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

PW;
Communications;
RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CMO

*

*

ES1.1.8
Outcome ES1.1. Enhanced
water quality in the City’s
waterways and reservoirs,
ES1.1.9
including the Chesapeake
Bay and its tributaries.

ES1.1.12
ES1.1.13
ES1.1.14

ES1.1.15

ES1.1.16

ES1.2.1

Encourage the use of Best Management Practices
(BMPs) reflective of Norfolk’s urban character in order
to reduce and filter stormwater runoff.
Consider revisions to development regulations to
require enhanced on-site storage and filtration of
stormwater for larger developments.

Work with community partners to explore potential
designation of Norfolk’s waterways as “No Discharge
Zones.”
Encourage all marinas in Norfolk to seek designation
as “Virginia Clean Marinas.”
Continue support of Hampton Roads Sanitation
District (HRSD) and City of Norfolk improvements to
the wastewater and stormwater systems.
Install and maintain animal waste clean-up stations at
community centers, beaches, schoolyards, and other
community gathering places.
Continue public outreach and education regarding the
responsible use of fertilizer, proper disposal of animal
waste, and other potential water quality improvement
actions.
Support the development of a regional greenhouse
gas emissions inventory and emission reduction
targets.

ES1.2.2

Support regional efforts to increase travel by
alternative modes, including the development of
“Complete Streets.”

Planning; PW; CMO

*

*

ES1.2.3

Encourage the use of alternative commuting patterns
such as remote workplace opportunities.

CMO;
Communications

*

*

ES1.2.4

Implement policies that discourage vehicle idling
periods greater than five minutes in any hour, and
encourage similar improvements in the private sector.

GS; NPS; CMO;
Communications

Immediate

Existing
Resources

ES1.2.5

Acquire City equipment and vehicles that utilize
alternative fuels or exhibit high fuel efficiency, when
feasible, in order to reduce carbon emissions.

GS

Ongoing

Several
Million

ES1.3.1

Increase the quantity, density, and diversity of trees to
achieve a goal of 40% tree canopy cover through a
combination of regulatory actions and City-provided
trees.

RPOS; Planning

Mid-Term

Over $1
Million

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-28

COMMENTS

Over $1
Million
Several
Million

Long-Term

ES1.1.7

Develop and implement a stormwater master plan.

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

PW; Planning

ES1.1.6

Outcome ES1.2. Clean,
healthy air that supports
plant, animal, aquatic,
and human life.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Part of work
program for
RC3.1.2.
Part of work
program for
T1.1.12 and
T1.3.1.
Part of work
program for
T1.1.12.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

ES1.3.2

Revise landscaping regulations to require the
placement of shade trees in parking lots.

ES1.3.3

Encourage the use of native species, for sustainability
and drought resistance purposes, wherever possible.

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Planning; RPOS

*

*

RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS; Planning

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

RPOS; Planning

*

*

ES1.3.7

Implement the Sand Management Plan (SMP)
Guidance Document (Appendix B) to promote sand
dune and beach stability, functionality, and resiliency
while promoting the economic vitality and ecological
resiliency of the Ocean View urban beach community
and recognizing that the bayfront has a variety of
distinct physical and geographic characteristics, each
with unique preservation and maintenance issues.

PW

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

ES1.3.8

Promote soil management best practices that enhance
stormwater infiltration capacity.

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES1.3.9

Ensure that former waste disposal sites are safe while
continuing to explore suitable reuse options.

PW; GS; Planning

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

ES1.3.10

Support the recruitment and expansion of “Green”
businesses and manufacturers.

Development

*

*

Part of work
program for
EV1.2.11.

Related to
RC3.1.3.

ES1.3.4
ES1.3.5
Outcome ES1.3. An
ES1.3.6
ecosystem that supports a
diversity of plant and
animal life.

Encourage developers to preserve, to the greatest
extent possible, existing, non-invasive trees, especially
larger ones.
Identify and control invasive species that threaten
natural ecosystems.
Encourage connections of open green spaces
throughout the City through the development of
pedestrian and bicycle corridors.

Part of work
program for
T1.3.3.

Environmental Sustainability Goal 2. Prepare for the consequences of natural hazards.
ES2.1.1

Evaluate the impact of potential sea level rise when
reviewing development proposals and in the
preparation of budgets, using Vision 2100 as a guide.

Planning; Budget

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES2.1.2

Promote growth in the least hazard-prone areas, as
determined by the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map
(Map ES-1), the Storm Surge Map (Map ES-2), the
Noise and Accident Potential Zones Map (Map LU-4),
and other emerging datasets identifying potential sea
level rise, land subsidence, and other hazards.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES2.1.3

Revise development regulations to respond to the
impact of potential sea level rise.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES2.1.4

Continue to monitor changes in tide data and its effect
on flooding throughout the City.

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES2.1.5

Evaluate options to mitigate the impact of natural
hazards, including flooding, using the Hampton Roads
Hazard Mitigation Plan and Vision 2100 as guides.

ES2.1.6
Outcome ES2.1. Reduced
risk and increased
resilience to gradual and ES2.1.7
catastrophic natural
events.
ES2.1.8

ES2.1.9

ES2.1.10

Develop a stormwater master plan that includes
consideration of issues of water volumes and rates of
discharge.
Continue to implement wetland design changes, such
as the use of living shorelines that allow for the
landward migration of wetlands, for resilience to sea
level rise.
Improve the City’s rating in the National Flood
Insurance Program’s Community Rating System (CRS).
Create incentives to encourage developments to be
built higher than the minimum Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) in mapped flood hazard areas and above grade
elsewhere in the City.
Ensure that all new development in designated floodprone areas complies with the City’s flood protection
regulations.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-29

PW; Resilience

Mid-Term

Several
Million

PW

*

*

Planning

*

*

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Related to ES2.1.8
and RC3.1.3.

Related to
N5.1.1(h),
N5.1.1(i),
N5.1.9(k),
N5.1.12(e).
Part of work
program for
ES1.1.5.
Part of work
program for
ES1.1.10.
Related to ES2.1.3.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

ES2.1.11

ES2.1.12

ES2.1.13

ES2.1.14

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

PW; Resilience

*

*

Planning

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

EM; IT;
Communications

*

*

Part of work
program for
CS2.3.4.

EM

*

*

Part of work
program for
RC2.1.7.

Planning; PW; RPOS

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

Planning; GS

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

CMO; GS; NRHA

Ongoing

Communications;
CMO; NRHA; RPOS

Ongoing

Planning;
Communications

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; NRHA

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

CMO; PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

Determine the appropriate strategies to mitigate the
impact of flooding to existing flood-prone structures.
Ensure that residents and property owners in flood
prone areas are notified of the threat to their
properties.
Identify areas of the City that are particularly
susceptible to inundation and develop a
communication strategy to notify residents in advance
of and during flood events.
Continue to participate in the development and
implementation of the Hampton Roads Hazard
Mitigation Plan to address potential hazards on a
regional basis.

COMMENTS

Related to ES2.1.5.

Environmental Sustainability Goal 3. Incorporate sustainability into daily living.
ES3.1.1

ES3.1.2

ES3.1.3

ES3.1.4
Outcome ES3.1. Reduced
energy consumption due ES3.1.5
to the application of
energy efficient design
features and technologies. ES3.1.6

ES3.1.7

ES3.1.8

ES3.1.9

ES3.2.1

Develop criteria for constructing new city facilities to
LEED or ICC International Green Construction Code
standards.
Develop criteria for applying LEED Existing Building
standards to renovations and rehabilitations of City
facilities.
Promote the use of alternative and sustainable energy
through supportive code changes to permit and
require the use of new technologies, such as solar and
wind power, while ensuring such technologies are
compatible in established residential areas.
Identify city-owned properties where alternative
energy sources could be utilized.
Promote “Green” municipal projects as models for the
private sector.
Promote the use of “Green” building technologies,
including weatherization, to provide energy
conservation benefits through programs such as the
Norfolk Green Home Choice Program.
Continue to offer incentives to encourage energy
efficient design and building, while evaluating the
feasibility of additional incentives for both new
construction and renovation projects.
Continue to monitor changes in technology and
legislation to identify opportunities for implementing
new "Green" building programs and enhancing
existing ones.
Create incentives to encourage developments to be
built higher than the minimum Base Flood Elevation
(BFE) in mapped flood hazard areas and above grade
elsewhere in the City.
Continue to offer, or sponsor in cooperation with local
institutions, environmental education and volunteer
stewardship opportunities.

Existing
Resources
Existing
Resources

ES3.2.2

Encourage the use of “environmentally-friendly”
building practices, such as green roofs, cool/white
roofs and pervious pavers, in private development.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES3.2.3

Adopt energy-efficient outdoor light standards to
reduce over-lighting of development sites, including
requirements to turn off outdoor lighting, other than
security lighting, after hours of operation.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Continue to support and promote household waste
recycling opportunities in both single family and
PW; Communications
multifamily housing and evaluate potential changes to
yard waste disposal practices.

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

ES3.2.5

Encourage citizens, neighborhoods, and businesses to
take a larger role in cleaning and maintaining public
spaces.

Communications

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES3.2.6

Promote the reuse of water through strategies such as
rain barrels, rain gardens, and grey water recycling.

CMO; PW

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Outcome ES3.2. Residents
who take responsibility
for reducing their impact
ES3.2.4
on the environment and
take steps towards
improving it.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-30

Revised September 2019

for reducing their impact
on the environment and
take steps towards
improving
Table IP-1.it.Implementation Matrix

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

ES3.2.7

Support the development of community gardens on
vacant or underutilized parcels as a way to encourage
urban agriculture.

CMO; ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ES3.2.8

Encourage the provision of independent back-up
sources of power to be used when primary power
source is interrupted for an extended period.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

COMMENTS

Housing Choices Goal 1. Ensure housing of high quality and sustainability.
HC1.1.1

HC1.1.2
Outcome HC1.1.
Conservation of existing
housing, through
restoration and
rehabilitation, as a
physical asset that
contributes to the value
and marketability of the
City.

Outcome HC1.2.
Increased usage of
sustainable technology,
design, and materials.

HC1.1.3

Continue to make residential pattern books available
to property owners seeking to renovate or rehabilitate
their homes.
Improve the effectiveness of code enforcement in
preventing deteriorated, unsafe, and unhealthy
housing conditions, especially in areas with persistent
enforcement problems, by educating residents and
landlords on code requirements.

HC1.1.4

Encourage the return of abandoned housing to safe
and useful occupancy through the Derelict Structures
Program, with demolition utilized as a last resort.

ND

*

*

HC1.1.5

Monitor code enforcement activity to identify
potential areas in need of housing rehabilitation.

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC1.1.6

Regularly assess housing conditions in Conservation
Areas and Special Service Districts to determine where
rehabilitation efforts have been successful.

NRHA

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning;
Communications

*

*

Part of work
program for
ES3.1.6.

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
ES3.1.7.

Planning

*

*

Planning

*

*

Planning

*

*

Budget; EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC1.2.1

HC1.2.2

HC1.3.1

Outcome HC1.3. Reduced
threats of property loss
due to flooding.

Identify areas in which technical support and tax or
other incentives available from the City will assist
owners to maintain or modernize their properties.

HC1.3.2

HC1.3.3

HC1.3.4

Promote the use of "Green" building technologies,
including weatherization, to provide energy
conservation benefits.
Continue to offer incentives to encourage energy
efficient design and building, while evaluating the
feasibility of additional incentives for both new
construction and renovation projects.
Improve the City’s rating in the National Flood
Insurance Program’s Community Rating System (CRS).
Ensure that all new development in designated floodprone areas complies with the City’s flood protection
regulations.
Ensure that residents and property owners in flood
prone areas are notified of the threat to their
properties.
Continue to pursue funding to raise or acquire homes
that have experienced repetitive loss due to flooding.

Part of work
program for
N2.1.5.

Part of work
program for
ES2.1.8.
Part of work
program for
ES2.1.10.
Part of work
program for
ES2.1.12.

Housing Choices Goal 2. Provide a range of housing choices that are accessible both in terms of geography and affordability.
Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC2.1.3

Seek opportunities to acquire vacant properties that
are potential candidates for foreclosure, through use
of federal programs such as the Neighborhood
Stabilization Program, so that these properties can be
renovated for sale to potential home buyers.

NRHA; Budget

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

HC2.1.5

Utilize GEM parcels to encourage the development of
owner-occupied affordable housing.

Development; NRHA;
Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

NRHA

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC2.1.2

Outcome HC2.1. An
increased rate of home
ownership.

Ensure that the real estate community is informed
about the diversity of housing types, and the other
attributes of housing, available in Norfolk.
Continue to support NRHA in the creation of new
home ownership opportunities in Conservation and
Redevelopment Areas.

ND

HC2.1.1

HC2.1.6

HC2.1.7

Continue to work with local lenders, non-profit
organizations, and housing providers to provide
education programs for financial counseling and
assistance in buying a home.
Continue to provide first-time homebuyers purchase
assistance and counseling services.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-31

Revised September 2019

Outcome
HC2.1.
An
Table IP-1.
Implementation
Matrix
increased rate of home
ownership.

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

NRHA

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC2.1.8

Develop and implement programs to enable
firefighters, teachers, police officers, nurses, city
workers, and other applicable public service
professionals to purchase homes.

HC2.1.9

Continue the tax relief program to assist low-income
homeowners faced with rising property taxes.

COR; Budget

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC2.1.10

Work to prevent foreclosures in coordination with
other governmental and non-profit organizations that
assist at-risk homeowners with financial and
foreclosure counseling.

NRHA

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HC2.2.1

Ensure that the Zoning Ordinance permits a variety of
residential densities and housing types.

Planning

*

*

Planning

*

*

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

NRHA; ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

*

*

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

HS; OEH

*

*

HS; OEH

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Planning

*

*

HC2.2.2

HC2.2.3

HC2.2.4

Outcome HC2.2. A variety HC2.2.5
of housing types that are
affordable and responsive
to the needs of owners
HC2.2.6
and renters.
HC2.2.7

HC2.2.8

HC2.2.9
HC2.2.10

HC2.2.11

Outcome HC2.3.
Elimination of
discriminatory housing
practices.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

HC2.3.1

HC2.3.2

Consider the use of density bonuses as a means of
promoting the production of affordable housing to
meet current and future demand.
Develop programs to discourage concentrations of
poverty, while ensuring affordable housing is located
in proximity to employment centers, service centers,
and public transit.
Continue to support the efforts of NRHA to provide
and improve the quality of housing for low- and very
low-income residents.
Utilize State and federal programs offering funding for
mixed-income and mixed-use projects, to leverage
private sector development interest and partnerships
for assistance in redevelopment actions.

Support the creation of a stable source of housing
IGR
development funds at the federal, State, and local
levels.
Encourage compatible infill housing on vacant or
Planning
underutilized parcels to minimize the impact of land
costs on housing.
Regularly assess the effects of City policies and
regulations on housing development costs and overall
Planning; Budget
affordability while considering the impact of housing
affordability on other objectives.
Provide leadership to create a balanced regional
OEH; IGR
supply of affordable housing.
Encourage a coordinated approach to the
OEH; NRHA; Planning
development of affordable housing, involving all
affected agencies.
Ensure information on the rights of tenants under the
ND
Virginia Residential Landlord and Tenant Act is
available to renters.
Continue to work with federal, State, and local
ND
agencies to ensure that fair housing legislation is
enforced.
Ensure that landlords, property managers, real estate
agents, lenders, and other housing-related
ND
professionals are aware of their responsibilities with
regards to fair housing regulations.

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.
Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Part of work
program for
RC2.1.3.

Housing Choices Goal 3. Ensure that the housing needs of the special needs populations are met.
HC3.1.1

HC3.1.2

HC3.1.3

Work with agencies throughout the region to develop
and implement policies and programs addressing the
needs of special needs populations.
Support home modifications and rental and utility
assistance to aid special needs populations with
remaining in their homes.
Revise the Zoning Ordinance to permit residents to
remain in their communities throughout the different
stages of life, by allowing a range of innovative and
non-traditional housing types.

Part of work
program for
RC2.1.4.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Outcome HC3.1. An
adequate supply of
housing to meet the
needs of special needs
populations.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-32

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

OEH

Ongoing

Several
Million

OEH

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

OEH

*

*

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

Outcome HC3.1. An
adequate supply of
housing to meet the
needs of special needs
populations.

Encourage the development of housing for special
needs populations near neighborhood centers,
OEH; Planning; NRHA
shopping centers, public transportation, schools,
parks, and open space.
Continue to support NRHA in its efforts to expand the
Planning
supply of assisted housing units for the elderly to meet
increasing demand for such units.

HC3.1.4

HC3.1.5

HC3.1.6

HC3.1.7

HC3.1.8

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

Support the development of a continuum of housing,
ranging from emergency shelters to transitional
housing to permanent housing, in order to assist the
homeless in regaining stable, permanent housing.
Continue to support and develop strategies to prevent
homelessness among families with children and
unaccompanied youth.
Continue to work in partnership with various levels of
government and public agencies to address
homelessness on a regional basis.

COMMENTS

Part of work
program for
RC2.1.5.

Lifelong Learning Goal 1. Provide learning opportunities that are responsive to the changing needs of Norfolk’s population.

Outcome LL1.1. Efficient
public schools,
appropriately sized to
meet the needs of the
school-aged population.

LL1.1.1

Continue to regularly evaluate the utilization of
existing public school facilities to determine the need
for adjustments to attendance zones or for the
construction, renovation, or closure of facilities.

NPS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LL1.1.2

Locate new school facilities on sites that meet criteria
as defined.

NPS; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LL1.1.3

Respond to socioeconomic needs and shifts in public
school enrollment through innovative techniques,
such as the use of the K-8 school model.

NPS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

NPS; RPOS

*

*

HS

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

HS

Ongoing

$100,000 to
$250,000

HS; Libraries; NPS;
RPOS

Immediate

$100,000 to
Related to LL1.3.5
$250,000

HS

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

HS

Short-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

HS; NPS

Short-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

Development

*

*

Budget

*

*

Development

*

*

HS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS; Libraries

*

*

LL1.1.4
LL1.2.1
LL1.2.2

LL1.2.3
Outcome LL1.2. Children
who are prepared for
success in school.

LL1.2.4

LL1.2.5

LL1.2.6

LL1.3.1

LL1.3.2
Outcome LL1.3. A welltrained, qualified
workforce.

LL1.3.3
LL1.3.4

LL1.3.5

Ensure that outdoor recreational facilities that share
sites with public schools are open and accessible to
residents outside school hours.
Identify and monitor programs to improve the quality
of learning within daycare centers.
Continue to implement programs designed to improve
readiness for school such as Norfolk Ready By 5 and
After the Bell.
Increase access to libraries, recreation centers, and
other community facilities to better utilize programs
such as early childhood literacy and after school care.
Increase the number and accessibility of high quality
child care homes and centers by removing regulatory
barriers.
Connect families with early intervention and support
services by implementing a universal newborn
screening and referral system.
Develop a focused outreach effort in the community
and education settings to increase awareness of the
importance of early childhood development.
Work with educational partners, both within and
outside of Norfolk, including universities, colleges, and
trade schools, to tailor their educational programs to
the changing opportunities presented by Norfolk’s
economy.
Support Norfolk Public Schools in efforts to provide
both college-track and trade education that is
responsive to economic opportunities.
Identify and provide opportunities for career training
and development of Norfolk residents that can lead to
jobs in Norfolk industries.
Support the availability of adult basic education and
GED programs.
Increase access to libraries, recreation centers, and
other community facilities to better utilize programs
aimed at increasing literacy and job readiness, and
assisting with job searches.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-33

Tied to CS1.1.1

Part of work
program of
DL1.1.4.

Part of work
programs for
EV1.3.1.
Part of work
programs for
EV1.3.2.
Part of work
programs for
EV1.3.3.

Part of work
program of
LL1.2.3.

Revised September 2019

Outcome LL1.3. A welltrained, qualified
workforce.
Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LL1.3.6

LL1.4.1
Outcome LL1.4.
Partnerships and
LL1.4.2
community resources that
provide opportunities for
training and continuing
LL1.4.3
education.

LL1.4.4

Identify and address the most significant barriers to
employment for the underemployed, unemployed and
those living in poverty.
Partner with the universities, colleges, medical
institutions, businesses, corporate entities, and the
military to provide opportunities for training and
continuing education.
Develop and implement a pilot program using schools
as neighborhood centers to offer lifelong learning
opportunities.
Develop a database of lifelong learning resources,
building on any existing databases, to better connect
residents with available opportunities.
Continue to work with the military, colleges and
universities to develop skills and enhance job
opportunities for veterans.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CMO

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

NPS; RPOS

Short-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

HS; Development

Short-Term

Up to
$100,000

CMO

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

COMMENTS

Community Services Goal 1. Ensure the availability of community facilities and services to meet the needs of the public, both daily and during
times of shock or stress.
Locate new city facilities on sites that are accessible to
the population being served and on sites that can
increase efficiency by accommodating multiple public
uses, while also serving as community and
neighborhood focal points.

GS; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

GS; PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

GS; PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

GS

Ongoing

Several
Million

CS1.1.6

Develop a long term strategy for the replacement of
aging city facilities, including as part of that strategy
consideration of the feasibility of consolidation and
the co-location of multiple facilities on one site.

GS; Budget

Immediate

$100,000 to
$250,000

CS1.1.7

Ensure that the City’s Emergency Operations Plan
addresses public and private infrastructure and service
needs during times of emergency, but also serves as a
daily planning document to address mitigation,
preparation, response and recovery from threats.

EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; IT

*

*

Police

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Police; GS

Ongoing

Several
Million

CS1.1.1

CS1.1.2

CS1.1.3
Outcome CS1.1. Resilient,
safe, adaptable, and well
CS1.1.4
maintained city facilities.
CS1.1.5

Outcome CS1.2. Improved
access to services through CS1.2.1
enhanced technology.

When evaluating potential sites for the location or
relocation of a city facility, consider vulnerability to
flood damage or isolation due to flooding or other
resilience factors using Vision 2100 as a guide and
noise and accident potential from aircraft operations
using AICUZ.
Design new city facilities to adapt to changing
technologies and to include flexible meeting spaces
that can host multiple users.
Incorporate resilience into design and location
processes for public buildings and spaces.
Continue to maintain existing city facilities, extending
their useful life through repairs and renovations,
including appropriate upgrades.

Explore opportunities for expediting development
processes, such as encouraging online submittal of
applications.

Related to LL1.1.2.

Part of work
program of
EV1.1.10.

Community Services Goal 2. Provide a safe environment for residents, workers, and visitors.
Outcome CS2.1. Police
CS2.1.1
protection and service
that are responsive to the
needs of the City’s
CS2.1.2
residents, visitors, and
businesses.

Maintain average emergency response times of 6½
minutes or less for Priority 1 calls.
Continue to explore alternatives that may reduce
response times throughout the City, such as the
relocation of existing facilities and the addition of new
facilities.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-34

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

CS2.2.1

Outcome CS2.2. Fire and
rescue services that
protect life, property, and
CS2.2.2
the environment.
CS2.2.3
CS2.2.4

CS2.3.1

CS2.3.2
Outcome CS2.3. Effective CS2.3.3
response to emergency
situations.
CS2.3.4

CS2.3.5

Maintain average emergency response times of no
more than 4 minutes for the deployment of the first
fire unit to the scene of a fire or medical emergency,
and no more than 8 minutes for the deployment of
the balance of a first alarm assignment or an
ambulance to the scene of a medical emergency.
Develop a long term strategy for improving and
expanding fire training spaces within the City, and
work to expand the number of facilities available for
shared regional training.
Maintain an International Insurance Services Office
(ISO) rating for fire safety of 2 or better.
Continue to provide fire and life safety education
programs in the public schools and elsewhere in the
community.
Maintain and update the Emergency Operations Plan ,
and continue to coordinate emergency planning
efforts with other local governments in the region,
non-profit organizations, and State and federal
agencies.
Annually undertake emergency operations drills,
simulating the City’s response to various emergency
situations.
Evaluate the City’s response following any declared
emergency.
Improve the City’s ability to provide residents with
timely information on changing conditions during
emergency situations.
Provide education and training to increase citizens’
ability to take mitigative actions prior to disaster
events.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Fire

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Fire

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Planning; Fire

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Fire; NPS;
Communications

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EM

*

*

EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

EM; IT

Immediate

$250,000 to
$1 Million

EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CS2.3.6

Improve post-event damage assessment procedures
so that damages, event frequencies, and other data
are more readily available for mitigation planning.

EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CS2.4.1

Continue to assess the behavioral characteristics of
surrendered and found animals to identify all suitable
candidates for adoption.

GS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Improve the ability of the Norfolk Animal Care Center
to identify animal ownership so that animals can be
returned to their homes whenever possible.

GS; Police; Treasurer;
IT

Immediate

Up to
$100,000

Encourage special events to promote the adoption of
animals housed at the Norfolk Animal Care Center.

GS; Communications

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Continue to encourage volunteerism and donations to
GS; Communications
help support the operations of the Norfolk Animal
Care Center.

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Outcome CS2.4. Animal CS2.4.2
care facilities that provide
safe haven for animals in
need of care.
CS2.4.3

CS2.4.4

COMMENTS

Part of work
program of
RC2.1.7.

Community Services Goal 3. Provide quality public utility services that meet the current and future needs of residents and businesses.
CS3.1.1

CS3.1.2

Outcome CS3.1. Clean,
safe drinking water
provided at the best
possible value to all
customers of the Norfolk
water system.

CS3.1.3

Maintain the ability to treat 100 million gallons of
drinking water per day.
Ensure compliance with the requirements of the Safe
Drinking Water Act by continuing to perform regular
testing and maintenance of the City’s drinking water
system.
Continue the implementation of the long term
infrastructure improvement plan to ensure regular
maintenance and improvements to the water
treatment and delivery system.

Utilities

*

*

Part of work
program for
CS3.1.3.

Utilities

*

*

Part of work
program for
CS3.1.3.

Utilities

Ongoing

Several
Million

CS3.1.4

Maintain, and expand where appropriate, regional
water production agreements in order to maximize
the return on the City’s infrastructure investments.

Utilities

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CS3.1.5

Continue to promote watershed protection programs
for people living within reservoir watershed areas.

Utilities

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CS3.1.6

Monitor upstream sources of pollutants that could
impact Norfolk’s water supply and intervene where
appropriate.

Utilities

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-35

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

CS3.2.1

Outcome CS3.2. A reliable
CS3.2.2
and efficient system for
the collection and
management of
wastewater from Norfolk
CS3.2.3
homes and businesses.

CS3.2.4

CS3.3.1

Outcome CS3.3. A safe,
reliable, and efficient
system for the collection
and management,
including recycling, of
Norfolk’s solid waste.

CS3.3.2

CS3.3.3
CS3.3.4

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

Maintain the ability to collect and transmit for
disposal 20 million gallons of wastewater per day.
Continue to perform regular testing, cleaning, and
maintenance of the City’s wastewater collection
system to ensure compliance with federal and State
environmental regulations.
Continue the implementation of the long term
infrastructure improvement plan to ensure regular
maintenance and improvements to the wastewater
collection and conveyance system.
Continue support of HRSD improvements to the
wastewater collection and treatment system.

Continue to require the screening of dumpsters.

CS3.3.6

COST
CATEGORY

COMMENTS

Utilities

*

*

Part of work
program for
CS3.2.3.

Utilities

*

*

Part of work
program for
CS3.2.3.

Utilities

Ongoing

Several
Million

Utilities; GS

*

*

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Mid-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

Maintain the ability to collect refuse and recycling on
PW
the day scheduled and remove dead animals within
one day of a report.
Increase participation in the curbside recycling
program, to achieve a target of recycling 25% or more
PW; Communications
of all solid waste collected, through continued
marketing and educational efforts.
Continue to support and promote household
PW; Communications
hazardous waste recycling opportunities.
Evaluate potential changes to yard waste disposal
PW
practices.

CS3.3.5

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

Ongoing
Immediate

Part of work
program for
ES1.1.14.

Existing
Resources
Existing
Resources
Existing
Resources

Planning; NPH

Ongoing

Establish screening requirements for smaller garbage
disposal containers.

Planning

*

*

CS3.4.1

Clear debris from at least 120,000 linear feet of
drainage ditches and 7,500 drain structures each year.

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CS3.4.2

Maintain the ability to sweep streets of debris on the
regularly-scheduled date.

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Continue regularly inspecting all Best Management
Practices (BMP) structures installed in the City, on
both public and private property, to ensure proper
maintenance and performance in accordance with the
City’s Virginia Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(VPDES) permit requirements.

PW

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Develop and implement a stormwater master plan.

PW; Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
ES1.1.5.

PW; Resilience

Ongoing

*

Part of work
program for
ES1.1.5.

PW; Communications

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Work with our utility partners to ensure access to
electricity, natural gas, and communication networks
both daily and during times of shock or stress.

EM

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Encourage the provision of independent back-up
sources of power to be used when primary power
source is interrupted for an extended period.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

RPOS; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Outcome CS3.4. A
CS3.4.3
stormwater management
system that reduces the
quantity and improves the
quality of stormwater
CS3.4.4
runoff.

CS3.4.5

CS3.4.6

CS3.5.1
Outcome CS3.5. Reliable
access to electricity,
CS3.5.2
natural gas, and
communication networks.
CS3.5.3

Continue to implement cost-effective capital
improvements that add resilience by improving
stormwater management and controlling flooding,
using Vision 2100 for guidance.
Continue to provide educational materials to Norfolk
property owners on the importance of keeping the
stormwater drainage system clean.
Continue to coordinate upgrades and replacement of
non-City provided utilities, including electricity,
natural gas and communication networks.

Part of work
program for
LU1.2.1.

Community Services Goal 4. Maintain the City’s cemeteries as places of honor and respect.
CS4.1.1
Outcome CS4.1. Wellmaintained cemeteries.

CS4.1.2

Ensure the continued maintenance and improvement
of city-owned cemeteries.
Support the efforts of the Norfolk Society for
Cemetery Conservation to preserve, protect, and
promote Norfolk’s historic cemeteries.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-36

Related to H1.1.4.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

COMMENTS

Daily Life Goal 1. Provide Norfolk residents with a rich variety of parks and recreational opportunities.
DL1.1.1

Locate parks and recreation facilities throughout the
City in proximity to residential areas, applying the set
standards.

RPOS; Planning

Ongoing

Several
Million

DL1.1.2

Provide recreational facilities to maintain a standard
of 15 acres of recreational land per 1,000 residents.

RPOS

*

*

RPOS;
Communications

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS; NPS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

RPOS

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

RPOS; PW

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Related to
N5.1.8(i).

DL1.1.7

Ensure that one public water access point is provided
for every ¼ mile of waterfront by maintaining existing
access points, particularly those that provide parking
and those along the Southeast Coast Paddling Trail,
and adding new access points, with a priority given to
physical access at existing parks, where none are
presently available.

RPOS; Planning

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

Related to
N5.1.22(d).

DL1.1.8

Provide a variety of programs at parks and
recreational facilities designed to meet the needs of
Norfolk’s residents through all stages of life, from
childhood to the retirement years.

RPOS

Ongoing

Several
Million

DL1.1.9

Periodically survey parks and recreation customers to
identify desired changes in facilities and programming.

RPOS

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

DL1.1.10

Provide learn-to-swim and boater safety programs for
children and adults at community centers, public
schools, and other providers of community services.

RPOS

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

DL1.1.11

Continue to work with the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers to maintain navigation channels in the City’s
waterways through maintenance dredging and other
channel improvement projects, in order to ensure
access for recreational boaters.

PW; Planning

Ongoing

Over $1
Million

DL1.1.3

DL1.1.4

DL1.1.5

DL1.1.6
Outcome DL1.1. A variety
of recreational programs
and facilities at
convenient locations.

Seek partnership opportunities with private sector
entities, including civic leagues, schools, religious
institutions, and other organizations to assist in
maintaining and operating parks and recreation
centers.
Ensure that outdoor recreational facilities that share
sites with schools are open and accessible to residents
outside school hours.
Design parks and recreational facilities to maximize
flexibility, so that they can be easily adapted to
changes in demographics.
Enhance public access to parks and recreational
facilities by making needed infrastructure
improvements to access roads, parking areas,
sidewalks, bikeways, boat ramps, and beach access
ways.

Part of work
program for
DL1.1.1.

Related to LL1.1.4.

Daily Life Goal 2. Provide the residents of Norfolk and the region with a variety of cultural opportunities.
DL2.1.1

DL2.1.2
Outcome DL2.1. Libraries
that provide access to
DL2.1.3
information for all
residents, and support
lifelong learning, cultural
enrichment, and
DL2.1.4
intellectual stimulation.

Ensure that public library facilities are located
throughout the City so that no resident lives more
than 2½ miles from a library.
Create comfortable and inviting common spaces
within libraries to invite users to interact with others
in the community.
Periodically survey library customers to identify
necessary changes in hours of operations and services
offered, as well as in the collections of books,
multimedia, and other materials.
Regularly re-evaluate technology and computer
resources to ensure the service demands and
technology needs of library customers are met.

Currently meet
standards.
Related to
N5.1.6(d).

Libraries; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Libraries; GS

Ongoing

$100,000 to
$250,000

Libraries

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Libraries; IT

Ongoing

Several
Million
Part of work
program for
H1.1.3.

DL2.1.5

Continue to provide library programs that celebrate
Norfolk’s cultural diversity and history.

Libraries

*

*

DL2.1.6

Continue to enhance programmatic offerings such as
early childhood literacy, after-school care, local history
and genealogy, and job search programs.

Libraries

Ongoing

$100,000 to
$250,000

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-37

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

ACTION

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

DL2.2.1

Continue to recognize the importance of the arts as an
economic tool by coordinating with and promoting
the activities of arts organizations such as the Virginia
Arts Festival, the Virginia Opera, the Virginia Stage
Company, and the Virginia Symphony Orchestra, as
well as arts programs offered by Norfolk State
University, Old Dominion University, and Tidewater
Community College.

CF; Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

DL2.2.2

Continue to provide Norfolk and regional residents
with access to cultural and entertainment
opportunities through support of facilities such as the
Attucks Theater, Chrysler Hall, the Chrysler Museum of
Art, Harbor Park, Harrison Opera House, the
MacArthur Memorial, Nauticus, the Norfolk Botanical
Garden, the Norfolk Scope Arena, Ocean View Park,
Town Point Park, and the Virginia Zoo, as well as
facilities located at Norfolk State University, Old
Dominion University, and Tidewater Community
College.

CF; CMO

Ongoing

Several
Million

DL2.2.3

Explore opportunities for collaborating across
jurisdictional boundaries in order to reduce
competition among regional cultural facilities and
entertainment venues.

CMO; CF

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

Outcome DL2.2. A variety
of cultural and
entertainment
opportunities.

COMMENTS

Daily Life Goal 3. Foster the development of a more vibrant, dynamic city.
DL3.1.1
DL3.1.2
DL3.1.3

DL3.1.4
Outcome DL3.1. A city
that retains and attracts
the creative class.

Support the efforts of the “creative class” as they work
CMO
to enhance the vibrancy of Norfolk’s culture.
Utilize new technologies to more effectively promote
IT; Communications
events and activities throughout the City.
Support the provision of art in public spaces
CF; RPOS
throughout the City.
Revise regulations to reduce restrictions on activities
that add “life” to the street in appropriate locations,
Planning; PW
such as street vending, parades, festivals, road races,
and other events.

Ongoing
Ongoing
Ongoing

Existing
Resources
$100,000 to
$250,000
Several
Million

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

DL3.1.5

Enhance pedestrian activity in appropriate locations to
encourage the development of a desired mix of uses.

Planning; PW

Ongoing

Several
Million

DL3.1.6

Support the creation of one or more “arts districts” in
Norfolk by making needed regulatory changes to
facilitate their development.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

DL3.1.7

Revise the Zoning Ordinance to encourage bicycle and
pedestrian travel.

Planning

*

*

DL3.1.8

Revise the Zoning Ordinance to require provisions for
bicycles in the design of new facilities.

Planning

*

*

Part of work
program for
T1.3.6.
Part of work
program for
T1.3.6.

Heritage Goal 1. Foster a greater awareness of Norfolk’s heritage for residents and visitors.

H1.1.1

Utilize a variety of communications methods, ranging
from printed materials, online information, and
municipal television channels, to workshops and
lectures, to raise awareness of Norfolk’s historic
resources and inform property owners and design
professionals about the need to maintain historic
properties and opportunities to revitalize historic
properties.

Planning;
Communications; IT

Ongoing

$100,000 to
$250,000

Outcome H1.1. Increased
information available to
H1.1.2
the public about Norfolk’s
historic resources.

Provide information, including maps of routes
between sites for walking, bicycling, or driving tours,
highlighting Norfolk’s history and architecture, as
defined by the Cannonball Trail, in a variety of forms
such as brochures, websites, and mobile applications.

Planning; IT

*

*

H1.1.3

Provide programs related to historic preservation,
continuing to use those provided by the Norfolk Public
Library and encouraging other City departments to
develop programs celebrating Norfolk’s history.

Libraries; RPOS

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

H1.1.4

Continue to work with the Norfolk Society for
Cemetery Conservation to increase awareness of the
historic and cultural value of those resources.

RPOS;
Communications

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-38

Part of work
program for
H1.1.1.

Related to CS4.1.2.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

H1.2.1
H1.2.2
Outcome H1.2. Improved
identification of historic
landmarks and districts. H1.2.3
H1.2.4

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Develop a process for expanding Cannonball Trail
markers.

Planning

Immediate

Identify new sites for Cannonball Trail markers.

Planning

Ongoing

Planning

Mid-Term

PW

Long-Term

Over $1
Million

Planning; Resilience

Mid-Term

Existing
Resources

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Long-Term

Up to
$100,000

Planning; Libraries; IT

Long-Term

Up to
$100,000

Planning; Budget

Long-Term

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Develop a local plaque program to recognize
contributing structures in historic districts or sites that
have local landmark designation.
Identify historic district boundaries through vintage or
special street signs in historic districts.

COMMENTS

Existing
Related to H1.2.3.
Resources
$250,000 to
$1 Million
$250,000 to Related to H1.2.1
$1 Million and H2.2.4.

Heritage Goal 2. Protect Norfolk’s historic resources.
H2.1.1
Outcome H2.1. New and
infill development that
respects surrounding
historic properties and
reflects the established
architectural pattern.

H2.1.2

H2.1.3

H2.1.4
H2.2.1

H2.2.2

H2.2.3
H2.2.4

Outcome H2.2. An
increased number of
historic resources,
including structures,
neighborhoods, and
cultural resources, that
are protected.

Develop innovative approaches and strategies related
to sea-level rise adaptation in historic neighborhoods.

Develop local historic district design guidelines
utilizing professional standards, such as the Secretary
Planning
of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, as the
basis.
Evaluate existing local historic district guidelines to
Planning
determine the need for updates at least every ten
years.
Encourage the use of design guidelines and pattern
Planning
books in National Register districts and other historic
areas for new infill construction.
Develop an up-to-date inventory of historic resources
Planning; Libraries; IT
readily available on the City’s website.
Update the inventory of historic resources at least
every ten years, evaluating the historic significance of
all buildings that are more than 40 years old.
Identify funding sources for updates to the inventory
of historic resources.
Revise the Zoning Ordinance to provide for
designation of local landmarks, including cultural
resources.

H2.2.5

Ensure that locally-designated landmarks are
appropriate and sensitive to their surroundings and
historic character in both appearance and use.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

H2.2.6

Work with neighborhoods to gain support for new
locally-designated historic districts and landmarks.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

H2.2.7

Communicate regularly with property owners in
neighborhoods that are designated local historic
districts regarding the regulations and policies in those
districts.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

H2.2.8

Discourage the performance of work in a local historic
district without a Certificate of Appropriateness (COA)
through the implementation of programs such as a
system of fees or fines for not obtaining a COA.

Planning; Budget

Immediate

Existing
Resources

H2.2.9

Utilize historic district design guidelines to promote
the appropriate maintenance and rehabilitation of
existing structures in historic districts.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

H2.2.10

Amend the Zoning Ordinance to permit the reuse of
nonconforming historic structures.

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IGR; Planning

Immediate

Existing
Resources

RPOS; Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

H2.2.11
H2.2.12

H2.2.13

H2.2.14

Promote the appropriate reuse of existing historic
structures through zoning incentives.
Promote reuse of historic structures through city
marketing efforts about programs such as tax
abatement.
Pursue the statutory authority to prevent demolition
by neglect in historic areas through heightened code
enforcement.
Preserve, protect, and promote Norfolk’s historic
municipal cemeteries through active conservation,
education, and advocacy.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-39

Related to
N5.1.12(d).

Related to H1.2.3.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix

IMPLEMENTATION ITEM

ACTION

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Planning

Short-Term

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

COMMENTS

Heritage Goal 3. Improve and streamline the Certificate of Appropriateness process.
Outcome H3.1. Expedited
review of projects going
H3.1.1
through the Certificate of
Appropriateness process.

Eliminate the duplicative process of review by two
bodies, the Design Review Committee and the
Planning Commission, in order to get a project
approved.

Regional Cooperation Goal 1. Enhance regional economic competitiveness.
RC1.1.1

RC1.1.2

RC1.1.3

Outcome RC1.1. A vibrant RC1.1.4
and growing metropolitan
region with the capacity
to compete successfully
with similarly-sized
RC1.1.5
regions in the eastern
United States.
RC1.1.6

RC1.1.7

RC1.1.8

Support development of a regional economic
development strategy to coordinate and guide
business development efforts.
Improve marketing, both collectively and individually,
of regional assets to attract new business and
investment to the region.
Explore opportunities for collaborations across
jurisdictional boundaries in order to reduce
competition.
Support the development of an efficient, multi-modal
transportation network, including high quality
connections to other metropolitan regions, to support
new business investment and activity.

Planning; PW

*

*

Part of work
program actions
under Outcome
T2.1.

Support educational institutions, programs, and other
related workforce development efforts to help create
and maintain a well trained and qualified workforce.

Development; NPS

*

*

Part of work
program for
EV1.3.1.

Continue to work with all jurisdictions in Hampton
Roads to strengthen major regional assets, including
the military, ports, medical institutions, colleges and
universities, and tourist destinations.

Development

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Utilities;
Development

*

*

IGR

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

*

*

Mid-Term

$100,000 to
$250,000

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ongoing

Up to
$100,000

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Encourage Norfolk’s water supply surplus to be
marketed and utilized as a major regional asset to
attract development.
Partner with Norfolk's General Assembly members to
develop consensus positions to enhance regional
competitiveness.

Part of work
program for
EV1.2.12.

Regional Cooperation Goal 2. Ensure efficient regional service delivery.
RC2.1.1

RC2.1.2

RC2.1.3
Outcome RC2.1. Efficient
coordination of regional
RC2.1.4
services.
RC2.1.5

RC2.1.6

RC2.1.7

Support continued development of regional
Utilities; PW;
approaches to addressing new federal and State
Planning
requirements for both wastewater and stormwater
management.
Study and adopt a new regional waste management
PW
structure for post-2018, when existing arrangements
are due to expire.
Encourage a coordinated approach to the
OEH; NRHA; Planning
development of affordable housing, involving all
affected agencies.
Work with agencies throughout the region to develop
HS; OEH; ND
and implement policies and programs addressing
special needs populations.
Continue to work in partnership with various levels of
OEH; NRHA
government and public agencies to address
homelessness on a regional basis.
Explore possible efficiencies to be gained by
Finance; GS
coordinating the purchase of municipal goods and
services.
Continue to improve regional mitigation strategies,
EM
emergency preparedness, responsiveness, and
evacuation planning.

Part of work
program for
ES1.1.14.

Regional Cooperation Goal 3. Support a regional approach to emerging issues that cross jurisdictional boundaries.
RC3.1.1
RC3.1.2
Outcome RC3.1. More
effective regional
approaches to emerging
issues of concern.

RC3.1.3

Coordinate land use planning at jurisdictional
boundaries to reduce land use conflicts.
Support the development of a regional greenhouse
gas emissions inventory and emission reduction
targets.
Coordinate with regional partners and programs
working on issues related to sea level rise.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-40

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CMO

Mid-Term

$250,000 to
$1 Million

Planning; PW

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Related to ES2.1.1
and ES2.1.3.

Revised September 2019

Table IP-1. Implementation Matrix
Outcome RC3.1. More
effective regional
approaches to emerging
issues of concern.ITEM
IMPLEMENTATION

ACTION

RC3.1.4

Continue to explore regional approaches, including
partnerships with universities and other organizations,
to address new and emerging region-wide issues and
topics.

LEAD RESPONSIBILITY

TIMEFRAME FOR
COMPLETION

COST
CATEGORY

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

COMMENTS

Implementation Goal 1. Ensure that plaNorfolk2030 remains a valuable tool for decision-making.
Review all land use applications for consistency with
plaNorfolk2030 .

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Ensure that proposed capital improvement projects
are consistent with the recommendations of
plaNorfolk2030 as required by the Code of Virginia.

Planning; Budget

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

CMO

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning; Budget; ND

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Regularly evaluate City codes to ensure that the goals
of plaNorfolk2030 are being implemented effectively.

CMO

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Regularly review the best practices of local
governments throughout the United States and
amend Norfolk’s codes, where appropriate, to ensure
that City codes are as effective as possible.

CMO

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Prepare a report evaluating the status and
effectiveness of plaNorfolk2030 implementation at
least every two years.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IP1.2.4

Review plaNorfolk2030 , in its entirety, every five years
to determine if there is a need for any amendments.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IP1.3.1

Consider amending plaNorfolk2030 when it is
determined that there has been a change in
conditions since adoption, when a plan or study
evaluates an area at a greater level of detail, or when
it is discovered that an error has been made.

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

Planning

Ongoing

Existing
Resources

IP1.1.1
Outcome IP1.1.
IP1.1.2
plaNorfolk2030 is used to
guide decision making
about physical
development and public IP1.1.3
infrastructure.
IP1.1.4

IP1.2.1

Outcome IP1.2. Effective IP1.2.2
tools that support the
implementation of
plaNorfolk2030 .
IP1.2.3

Outcome IP1.3.
plaNorfolk2030 is
amended whenever
conditions warrant.

IP1.3.2

IP1.3.3

Encourage City departments and outside agencies to
develop work plans that are consistent with the
recommendations of plaNorfolk2030 .
Evaluate grant requests, including Community
Development Block Grant applications, against the
requirements of plaNorfolk2030 .

Ensure newly completed area plans are adopted by
reference into plaNorfolk2030 , amending
plaNorfolk2030 to reflect the recommendations of the
area plan, where appropriate.
Process amendments to plaNorfolk2030 according to
requirements established by the Code of Virginia and
City code.

* Cost for this action included in another action as noted under comments.

13-41

Revised September 2019

plaNorfolk2030 Amendments
AMENDMENT
NUMBER

FILE
NUMBER

COUNCIL
ACTION

1

130202A

45068

TowneBank

Residential
Mixed

Commercial

2

130703A

45251

BDC Princess Anne LLC

Industrial

Commercial

EA's Little Blessings

Single Family
Traditional

Commercial

3
4

131103A
131102A

45398
45400

LAND USE
FROM

APPLICANT NAME

First Church of God

Institutional
Industrial,
Residential
Mixed
Single Family
Traditional

LAND USE TO

Single Family
Suburban
Commercial,
Residential
Mixed
Residential
Mixed
Single Family
Traditional
Commercial

5

131101A

45418

Chelsea Business Association

6

131201A

45419

Crossings at Campostella Station

7

140101A

45452

Christ's Sanctified Holy Church

Institutional

8

130902A

45458

Tidewater Commerce Center

9

131202A

45469

Church Street Station

Industrial
Industrial, Single
Family Urban,
Multifamily
Utility/
Transportation

10

140201

45498

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

LOCATION
1006 Colley Avenue
3350 E. Princess Anne
Road
956-960 Berkley Avenue
Extended
8620 Granby Street

11/14/2013

1/14/2014

Chelsea Business Area

12/19/2013

2/11/2014

1050 Berkley Avenue
Extended

12/19/2013

2/11/2014

4820 Beamon Road

1/23/2014

2/25/2014

630-660 Tidewater Drive

9/26/2013

2/25/2014

2000 Church Street, 18161824 O'Keefe Street

12/19/2013

3/4/2014

NA

Text amendment to establish
locational criteria and
performance standards for
automobile-related
establishments, including the
East Little Creek Road and
Military Highway Corridors

2/27/2014

3/25/2014

Text amendment to establish
development criteria to
encourage the transition of the
Granby/Monticello Corridor
from industrial and automobilerelated uses to a higher
intensity of mixed use
development

4/24/2014

5/20/2014

4/24/2014

5/20/2014

4/24/2014

5/20/2014

3921 E. Ocean View
Avenue

4/24/2014

5/20/2014

600 Talbot Hall Road

4/24/2014

6/24/2014

5/22/2014

6/24/2014

2800-2820 Church Street

6/26/2014

7/22/2014

7307-7321 Woodfin
Avenue

7/24/2014

8/26/2014

6282 Northampton
Boulevard

7/24/2014

8/26/2014

601-609 36th Street

8/28/2014

9/23/2014

200 E. 22nd Street
1402-1446 Church Street,
709-713 Washington
Avenue

8/28/2014 10/14/2014

NA

NA

NA

12

140402

45550

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

13

140402

45551

City Planning Commission

Single Family
Suburban

Single Family
Traditional

Glenrock South

14

140403A

45553

James Sheppard

Commercial

15

140404A

45596

Talbot Hall West, LLC

Institutional

City Planning Commission

17

140601

45624

NRHA

NA

NA

Single Family
Multifamily
Traditional
Corridor
Single Family
Institutional
Traditional
Office and Open
Commercial
Space/
Recreation
Single Family
Commercial
Urban
Industrial
Multifamily

18

140701A

45642

Norfolk Collegiate School

19

140301A

45646

Norfolk Premium Outlets

20

140801A

45695

The Hanson Company, LLC

21

140804A

45700

Edward McCullough

22

140803A

45742

Maplewood Plaza

Single Family
Urban

Commercial

23

140902A

45745

Char-Mar Trucking

Single Family
Traditional

Industrial

24

140901A

45799

NRHA

Open
Space/Recreatio Multifamily
n

4/24/2013

1/14/2014

City Planning Commission

45593

2/28/2013

10/8/2013

45549

140501

COUNCIL
ACTION
DATE

7/25/2013

140401

16

CPC ACTION
DATE

11/14/2013

11

Residential
Mixed
Single Family
Suburban

NOTES

NA

Text amendment to revise
certain metrics and actions and
to make typographical
corrections
Map amendment to correct
Future Land Use in Glenrock
South

Text amendment to establish
development criteria related to
landscaping, setbacks, and
parking to encourage a mix of
uses and enhanced pedestrian
activity along the southernmost
sections of Colonial Avenue and
Granby Street in the Park Place
neighborhood

9/25/2014 10/28/2014

1250 E. Brambleton
Avenue, 708 Cecelia Street

9/25/2014 10/28/2014

3321 Kimball Terrace

11/13/2014

12/9/2014

Revised September 2019

plaNorfolk2030 Amendments
AMENDMENT
NUMBER

FILE
NUMBER

COUNCIL
ACTION

LAND USE
FROM

25

141201A

45842

Edward McCullough

Commercial

Multifamily

26

150503A

45982

Captain's Landing, LLC

Commercial

Residential
Mixed

APPLICANT NAME

CPC ACTION
DATE

COUNCIL
ACTION
DATE

1235-1237 Courtney
Avenue, 1140-1148 E.
Princess Anne Road

12/11/2014

1/27/2015

923-929, 1001-1007 E.
Ocean View Avenue and
9640 Chesapeake Street

5/28/2015

6/23/2015

5/28/2015

6/23/2015

7/23/2015

8/25/2015

Text amendments to adopt the
Bicycle and Pedestrian Strategic 11/12/2015
Plan

12/8/2015

LAND USE TO

LOCATION

27

150101

45985

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

28

150701A

46020

City of Norfolk

Office

Commercial

6000 Northampton
Boulevard

29

151101

46134

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

30

150802A

46168

West Norfolk Marketplace, LLC

Multifamily
Corridor

Commercial

1209 W. 26th Street

31

150802B

46169

West Norfolk Marketplace, LLC

Industrial

Commercial

2330 Bowdens Ferry Road

NOTES

Text amendments to revise
certain actions related to the
100 Resilient Cities Initiative
and to make other minor
updates and corrections

8/27/2015 12/15/2015
8/27/2015 12/15/2015
Text amendments to add and
12/10/2015
modify actions in four
"emerging districts"
Text amendments to adopt the
12/10/2015
Complete Streets Policy
Text and map amendments to
1/28/2016
establish the coastal character
district

32

151201

46206

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

33

151202

46207

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

34

160101A

46260

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

35

160201A

46352

Pinewell Station

Open Space
/Recreation and Multifamily
Commercial

600 and 719 E. Ocean View
Avenue

2/23/2016

5/10/2016

36

160401A

46388

City of Norfolk

Institutional

Residential
Mixed

2415 Ballentine Boulevard

4/28/2016

5/24/2016

Office

900 and 901 Asbury
Avenue

5/26/2016

6/28/2016

5/26/2016

6/28/2016

6/23/2016

7/19/2016

6/23/2016

8/23/2016

37

160501A

46448

City of Norfolk

Institutional

38

160502

46446

Norfolk City Council

NA

NA

NA

39

160601

46486

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

40

160402A

46518

Norfolk Christian Schools

Single-Family
Traditional

Institutional

260 Filbert Street
9500 and 9510 30th Bay
Street
5516 Raby Road

41

160901A

46634

East Beach Company

Commercial

42

160902A

46645

Royal Farms

Institutional

Residential
Mixed
Commercial

43

161001

46650

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

44

161101A

46680

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

45

161201

46707

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

46

170201A

46816

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

47

170202A

46775

Sentara Healthcare

Single-Family
Traditional

Commercial

509 Yoder Ave, 6012-6044
Benton St, 500-520 Lucas
Ave, 812-820 Poplar Hall
Dr, 6015 Poplar Hall Dr

48

170601

46915

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

49

170801

46974

Monument Development Two LLC

Institutional

Galaxy NC LLC

Single Family
Suburban

50

51

171002

171201

47066

47115

City Planning Commission

NA

Multifamily
Corridor
Single Family
Traditional

NA

Text amendments to adopt
Sand Management Plan
Text amendments to add and
modify actions for the Greater
Wards Corner area

1/26/2016
1/26/2016
2/23/2016

10/27/2016 11/22/2016
10/27/2016 11/22/2016
Text amendments to adopt
10/27/2016 11/22/2016
Vision 2100
Text amendments to
11/10/2016 12/13/2016
incorporate new FIRM map
Text amendments to adopt and
12/8/2016 1/24/2017
incorporate Military
Circle/Highway Plan
Text amendments to adopt
2/23/2017 4/25/2017
Norfolk Traditional
Neighborhoods Plan Book

2/23/2017

3/28/2017

6/22/2017

8/22/2017

2607 Colonial Avenue

8/24/2017

9/26/2017

701-733 Pecan Point Road

10/26/2017 12/12/2017

NA

Text amendments to
incorporate new or modified
actions from April 2017 biennial
evaluation

Text amendments to add or
modify actions, revise
Character Districts, and adopt
12/14/2017
Coastal Character District
Pattern Book in support of new
Zoning Ordinance

1/23/2018

Revised September 2019

plaNorfolk2030 Amendments
CPC ACTION
DATE

COUNCIL
ACTION
DATE

2676-2690 and 5211-5215
Azalea Garden Road

12/14/2017

3/13/2018

Utility /
Transportation

4301 Powhatan Avenue

5/24/2018

6/26/2018

NA

NA

NA

5/24/2018

7/10/2018

Provision Pros

Multifamily
Corridor

Commercial

8/23/2018

9/25/2018

47381

Sentara Orthopedic

Commercial

Institutional

8/23/2018

9/25/2018

180701

47384

Equity Development Corp.--The
Tern

Commercial

Residential
Mixed

8/23/2018

9/25/2018

58

181202

47513

Franklin Johnston Group

Office

Residential
Mixed

12/13/2018

1/29/2019

59

190101

47741

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

7/25/2019

8/27/2019

60

190301

47604

Grace Bible Church

Commercial

Institutional

6401 Tidewater Drive

3/28/2019

4/23/2019

6/27/2019

7/23/2019

6/27/2019

7/23/2019

AMENDMENT
NUMBER

FILE
NUMBER

COUNCIL
ACTION

LAND USE
FROM

52

171202

47159

DSF Development

Single Family
Suburban

Multifamily

53

180502

47271

Hampton Roads Sanitation District

Open Space /
Recreation

54

180501

47283

City Planning Commission

55

180802

47379

56

180801

57

APPLICANT NAME

LAND USE TO

LOCATION

NOTES

Amendment to Appendix B in
the Table of Contents to adopt
by reference the Norfolk Green
Infrastructure Plan

2807, 2811 Lafayette
Boulevard, 3132 Verdun
Avenue, 3133 Marne
Avenue
6203-6227 East Virginia
Beach Boulevard, 890
Kempsville Road
4035-4039 East Ocean
View Avenue, 9632-9657
21st Bay Street, 9601 22nd
Bay Street
5827 and 5845 Curlew
Drive and 5786 Sellger
Drive

61

190601

47717

City Planning Commission

NA

NA

NA

62

190602

47710

Equity Development Corp.

Institutional

Multifamily
Corridor

8501, 8511 Chesapeake
Boulevard, 8506 Old Ocean
View Road

Amendment to Appendix A in
the Table of Contents to adopt
by reference the Commercial
Pattern Book
Amendment to Appendix C in
the Table of Contents to adopt
by reference A Vision for Wards
Corner: Urban Development
Area Plan and to modify several
actions

Revised September 2019

